Micromobility in New York City - Regulation, Accountability, and Safety
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure | Committee on Consumer and Worker Protection | Committee on Public Safety · September 30, 2026 · 10hrs 1m
Source: https://hearinghearings.nyc/hearings/committee-on-transportation-and-infrastructure-micromobility-in-new-york-city-regulation-2026-09-30/
Video: https://councilnyc.viebit.com/vod/?s=true&v=NYCC-PV-CH-CHA_260930-100340%20-%20join.mp4

================================================================

(00:00:10)

Silence, please.

(00:00:14)

Good morning. Welcome to the New York City Council hearing on the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, Consumer and Worker Protection and Public Safety. At this time, please silence electronics and do not approach the dais. Make sure you are assigned a slip if you have not done so already with the Sergeant at Arms. Any questions or concerns, please reach the Sergeant at Arms. Thank you for your cooperation. Chair, you may begin.

(00:00:39)

Good morning and welcome to today's joint hearing of the New York City Council's Committees on Transportation and Infrastructure, Consumer and Worker Protection and Public Safety. I am CM Shaun Abreu, Majority Leader and Chair of the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure. I would like to thank Speaker Menin, Chair Epstein and Chair Louis, the administration and all of you for being here today to discuss this very important topic.

To begin, I want to return to the days before we announced this hearing. A 17-year-old man, Gabriel Mercado, was on his way to work one morning on an e-bike that his uncle purchased for him. His family had been told by the seller that the machine was safe and legal. Neither were true.

The company, which encouraged riders to quote "fuel the rush," sold a bike that was faster and more powerful than permitted on our streets. Gabriel died just outside City Hall. E-bike collisions are up 31.7% this year over last year. E-bike technology has expanded in remarkable ways, expanding how New Yorkers commute, transforming our food delivery landscape and providing new recreational opportunities, but our infrastructure and policy has not kept up and there has been a deadly cost.

Before we proceed, I also want to acknowledge that there have been 10 hit-and-run deaths in New York City in less than two months. These were pedestrians and cyclists who were hit by cars that fled the scene to avoid accountability. The drivers in these cases include reckless drivers traveling at high speeds in neighborhoods known for speed racing as well as commercial drivers and trucks unsafe for busy pedestrian corridors. Even as we have prepared for this hearing, our efforts to address dangerous drivers and crashes have never slowed. On October 27, our Vision Zero hearing will include a suite of bills aimed at addressing the risk from cars. We can and will address street safety from every angle.

I will now turn it over to our Speaker, Julie Menin.

(00:02:57)

Thank you so much, Majority Leader Abreu. I really want to thank you and the other chairs, Chair Epstein and Chair Louis, and all of the staff of all three committees for their work in preparing for today's critical hearing.

Today we are examining an issue that touches the lives of millions of New Yorkers, and I think we see that from the incredible turnout from all of you today. Micro mobility devices and the need to ensure that they are used safely and responsibly on our streets — over the past two decades New York City has made tremendous progress in expanding transportation options. We have invested in bicycle infrastructure, introduced bike sharing and embraced new technologies that allow New Yorkers to move through our City more efficiently and sustainably. Motorized micro mobility devices have become commonplace on our streets, with electric bicycles, electric scooters and other devices becoming an integral part of New York City. They have created new modes of commuting, expanded access to jobs and become an essential tool for thousands of working New Yorkers. But with these opportunities comes a responsibility to ensure that our streets remain safe for everyone.

Over the years we have heard repeatedly from pedestrians who are afraid to walk on crowded sidewalks, who have been forced to look left, right and left again, literally, to feel safe crossing the street. We have seen cyclists concerned about faster motorized devices in bicycle lanes and delivery workers who face dangerous conditions while simply trying to earn a living. We have also seen the devastating consequences of serious collisions and hit-and-runs that leave families and communities in grief and in pain, and I know we are going to hear from many of them today. No New Yorkers should have to choose between getting where they need to go and feeling safe on our streets.

As Speaker, I believe the Council has a responsibility to meticulously examine the micro mobility landscape and address the major gaps in our laws that have emerged, particularly as technology and transportation habits have changed. But we also have a responsibility to hold the administration accountable for enforcing the laws that are already on the books — laws that ban the operation and the sale of high-speed uncertified devices in our City, some of which have not been enforced in decades. Several of the recent tragedies we have seen this summer involved motorized micro mobility devices that should never have been allowed to be sold, purchased or ridden in the first place.

Last month I also sent a letter to Commissioner Flynn asking that they work with Lyft to implement age verification technology for riders. Let me be clear: we are also working on legislation, which we will be releasing very soon, that will mandate that safety precaution. Other approaches, such as larger and more visible identification numbers on Citi Bike to increase accountability, should be immediately enforced. These common sense ideas can be legislated along with an educational campaign to keep minors safe.

Addressing this safety crisis is a multi-pronged effort. It requires informing consumers of the safety of the products they are advertised and sold, and ensuring that the delivery companies share responsibility for the safety of the workers who power their operations. Let me just say another word on that. Licensing — and I say this as a former Commissioner of the Department of Consumer and Worker Protection — licensing is one of the most powerful regulatory tools we have, and we as a Council intend to use it. We have bills in this package that will force the third-party apps to be licensed and put the onus on them in terms of safety, and I think that is really important.

We are also in this hearing hearing a record 23 bills. That has never been done by the City Council. This is a City Council record of 23 bills, and I really want to thank the chairs and my colleagues for all of the bills that they have put forward. Today's hearing truly reflects the Council's commitment to addressing these challenges through a comprehensive approach that brings together infrastructure enhancements, robust protections for consumers, for workers, for pedestrians and public safety principles, without needing to pit pedestrians, cyclists, delivery workers and other road users against each other.

Today we look forward to hearing from the administration, from advocates, from industry representatives, some delivery workers and from members of the public as we work to make the City's streets safer for everyone. I am going to turn it back over to Chair Abreu. I just want to mention we have multiple hearings going on. I will be stepping out right now for about 30 minutes and then will be right back to ask a lot of questions of the administration and to hear from the public. So I will turn it back over to Chair Abreu. Thank you.

(00:08:17)

Thank you, Speaker Menin. Since the legalization of certain bikes and e-scooters in 2020, the micro mobility landscape in New York City has evolved considerably. The number and variety of devices on our streets have grown, app-based delivery services have expanded and the distinctions among street-legal devices and illegal ones are not always clear to consumers, retailers or enforcement agencies. One thing is clear, though: motorized micro mobility devices are here to stay. But

(00:08:47)

we need to integrate these devices more intentionally into our street design and our regulatory schemes if we want to avoid tragedies like the ones we saw far too many of this summer. The recent spate of fatal collisions is a devastating confirmation of what we already know.

High-power, high-speed devices are not safe for New York City streets. When it comes to speed, 20 is plenty. That is why the State has already laws on the books banning the sale and operation of high-speed devices, but exceptions that allow faster bikes in the City and uneven enforcement have made our streets less safe.

That is why I have introduced a package of bills to close the enforcement gap. Int 0985-2026 and Int 0986-2026 help get dangerous devices off our streets and facilitate an equitable transition to slower, safer devices for those who need them. Int 0988-2026 helps to stop dangerous devices from reaching our streets in the first place by cracking down on false advertising by retailers. Int 0989-2026, Int 1021-2026 and Int 1066-2026, as well as my preconsidered intro, demand that private companies step up and do their part in all of this by implementing stronger safety measures to protect their riders and disclosing vital safety-related data to regulators. And of course, it remains critical that the City continues to upgrade its micro mobility infrastructure to meet the needs of motorized devices, commercial riders and all New Yorkers.

Today we have a unique opportunity to bring our stakeholders together — our delivery workers, our recreational bikers, our retailers, our share system operators, our enforcement agencies and our lawmakers. I hope that we can have a frank and forthcoming conversation about existing challenges and where we need to go from here.

I also have detailed testimony on the nearly two dozen pieces of legislation across the three committees. In the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, we will hear Int 0110-2026, sponsored by CM Brooks-Powers, in relation to delivery devices used for commercial purposes and to repeal section 10-157.1 of such code relating to signs where the bicycle safety procedures. Int 0214-2026, sponsored by CM Shahana Hanif, in relation to requiring micro mobility share system operators to display rules of the road for safe operation. Int 0985-2026, sponsored by myself, in relation to the establishment of a trade-in program concerning powered bicycles. Int 0988-2026, sponsored by myself, in relation to prohibiting the advertisement of vehicles required to be registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles as powered bicycles or powered mobility devices and related outreach. Int 0989-2026, sponsored by myself, in relation to bike share safety reporting. Int 1004-2026, sponsored by CM Maloney, in relation to pedestrian safety. Int 1066-2026, sponsored by CM... in relation to the installation of traffic calming devices in bicycle lanes. A preconsidered intro sponsored by myself in relation to the installation of sidewalk riding detection technology on electric bicycles and electric scooters that are part of share systems. A preconsidered intro sponsored by CM Hudson in relation to the operation of Class B e-bikes.

Res 0043-2026, sponsored by CM Brewer, which would call on the State Legislature to pass and the New York State Governor to sign S.7587/A.7833, known as the Commercial E-Bike Licensing Act, which requires the registration of bicycles with electric assists used for commercial purposes and creates liability for employers for certain violations. And Res 0044-2026, sponsored by CM Brewer, which would call on the State Legislature to pass and the Governor to sign legislation increasing the penalty for leaving the scene of a collision involving a scooter.

Lastly, I would like to thank my staff and the committee staff for their hard work in preparing for today's hearing: Lisa... my Deputy Chief of Staff, Jake Bori my advisor, Sarah Townsend Senior Counsel to the Committee, Theodore Miller Counsel to the Committee, Kevin and John Brazil Senior Policy Analyst at the Committee and staff of the Committees on Consumer and Worker Protection and Public Safety.

(00:13:04)

Thank you. Thank you, Speaker Menin, Majority Leader Abreu and Chair Louis for holding this hearing. My name is Harvey Epstein. I am the Chair of the Committee on Consumer and Worker Protection. The City has experienced a tremendous increase in e-bikes and e-scooters over the last decade.

Getting New Yorkers out of cars is something we should celebrate. However, the growth comes with challenges for New Yorkers, creating a proliferation of illegal devices. The City's bike lanes are used by devices going many different speeds, and even in places and spaces with double parking and gaps in the network, people are being put in very dangerous situations. One of the most urgent challenges is to reduce the rate of injury and death to pedestrians and micro mobility users. There have been 20 cyclist fatalities so far this year, the most recent just on Monday. On Sunday, we learned of the tragic death of a pedestrian who was hit by an e-bike in Central Park.

I look forward to a robust conversation about how we can improve micro mobility safety. The legislation before us today reflects the memory of the 15-year-old who was pulled over a week ago and passed away in my district while operating an e-bike.

The Consumer and Worker Protection Committee will be hearing nine separate bills: Int 0078-2026, Int 0095-2026, Int 0244-2026, Int 0389-2026, Int 0787-2026, Int 0950-2026 and Int 1021-2026. As the Speaker already said, we are hearing almost two dozen bills to try to deal with this comprehensive problem. We are looking forward to coming up with cooperative and thoughtful solutions that bring things together. Just let people know there is going to be no easy fix here. Whether it is talking about age verification or company responsibilities, all these issues have to come together in total.

I want to thank my staff, my Legislative Director Jenna Mahan and our committee staff Natalie and Sarah for all their work to make this happen. I would like to pass this over to CM Louis for his opening statement.

(00:15:29)

Thank you. Thank you so much. Good morning, everyone. I am New York City CM Oswald Feliz, Chair of the Committee on Public Safety. I would like to thank Majority Leader Shaun Abreu and Chair Harvey Epstein for co-chairing this hearing, and I would also like to thank Speaker Julie Menin for your leadership on this very important topic: the safe usage of bikes, scooters and mopeds on the streets of New York City.

Micro mobility devices are now a regular part of New York City transportation. Scooters, bicycles and more are being used across the City every single day, now more than ever. The growth in their use makes it increasingly important that they are operated safely and responsibly and that the rules governing them are clear and effective. Micro mobility devices — bikes, scooters, small pods — provide significant benefits to our communities. They expand transportation options, reduce congestion and make daily commuting more convenient. They allow users to quickly get from point A to point B. We must do everything to encourage their use, as they provide many benefits.

At the same time, we must ensure that these devices are used safely and responsibly. When riders operate these devices recklessly — driving on sidewalks, driving the wrong way, speeding, running red lights — they create serious problems for all of us. They create foreseeable risks of injury. They also create needless worry and stress for pedestrians who deserve to feel safe on our streets. We must ensure that we do everything we can to ensure

(00:17:09)

That our laws are effective in helping us achieve our safety-related goals on this topic from the perspective of the Committee on Public Safety. I want to focus particularly on how our laws are being enforced on the street. The NYPD is responsible for enforcing many of the rules covering the operation of these devices. This includes traffic violations such as running red lights, speeding, riding the wrong way, operating on sidewalks, as well as enforcement against devices that are not legal to operate on our streets. The Committee seeks to understand how enforcement is being carried out in practice. NYPD data shows that traffic enforcement involving bicycles, bikes, scooters and mopeds has increased this year. We want to better understand how the department is enforcing speed limits and other violations involving illegal devices and how it identifies those devices when an officer encounters them on the streets.

Equally important, we also want to understand and get a full picture of the operation related to the crackdown on illegal mopeds. We know that the NYPD has been doing a lot of work on the seizure of these mopeds, something that, by the way, as we know, could be challenging. But if we seize, let us say, a thousand mopeds during the summer and a thousand new ones enter our communities, we will never, ever see any progress. What is crucial is that we think about the full picture, including how we can tackle this issue at the point of sale.

The two bills in the Committee on Public Safety, Int 0787-2026, sponsored by CM Brooks-Powers, which will require the NYPD to report on targeted traffic enforcement operations, and Int 1052-2026, sponsored by CM Vickie Paladino, which would require reporting on crashes involving micro-mobility devices, would both provide great information about where enforcement is taking place and where the crashes involving these devices are occurring.

I would like to thank the New York City Police Department and the Department of Transportation, the Department of Consumer and Worker Protection and all of the stakeholders testifying today. I would also like to thank my staff and committee staff for their hard work. I look forward to today's productive discussion on how the NYPD is enforcing our micro-mobility laws at the street level, how the department is reporting that data and what information we need to better understand and improve street safety for everyone. Thank you. I will pass it back to Chair Brewer.

(00:19:41)

Thank you, Chair. Now I would like to pass it over to a few of my colleagues who would also like to speak on the legislation they are sponsoring today. I will begin with CM Brewer, followed by CM Hanif.

(00:19:55)

Thank you very much. Int 0078-2026 is the retention of delivery data. I think there are around 400,000 bike deliveries every day. The Council has a different number, but that is my number. The delivery apps know how the trips are assigned and routed in real time, but the City does not. So this intro closes that gap. It gives us information about the vehicle types and the deadlines imposed by the apps, so we can understand how company practices have an impact. We do a lot of talking about the behavior, but we need to look at the companies setting the routes, the deadlines and the expectations.

Number two is Int 0095-2026, information at the point of sale. You heard about operating requirements, but that information is not necessarily where it needs to be, which is at the point of sale. Retailers would have to provide purchasers with City-prepared information. This matters as the number and variety of motorized two-wheeled vehicles on our streets continues to grow. Apparently there are 1,036 e-bike, scooter and moped riders that have been injured in crashes in 2026, and 18, as we know, have been killed.

Liability for delivery apps: Int 0994-2026, slightly controversial, but with all the 400,000 deliveries taking place, app-based delivery is no longer a small part of our transportation system. The companies that profit from using our streets need to carry responsibility when that work results in an injury or damage to property. This requires third-party food delivery companies to maintain liability insurance when a worker is making a delivery or is logged on and available to make one. The company could not obtain a City license without coverage and a lapse in coverage would void its license. I do worry about the workers. I want to make sure they are not hurt by this, but we need to work on it to make sure that there is an insurance reserve.

The Commercial E-Bike Licensing Act talks about doing that in Albany. The notion is for commercial e-bikes to have licenses — again, controversial, but it is up to Albany. Leaving the scene of a crash: Int 0044-2026. State law already says that there are consequences for motorists who leave the scene of a crash, and we are talking about more for e-scooters and asking the State to include bikes as well. This type of vehicle does not change the obligation to stop when someone has been injured. It is important to stay at the scene. Obviously we have so many bikes, scooters and mopeds and they are part of our transportation system. I want to thank everyone for being here today. I want to thank all the people who are on the podium. This is an important issue. Perhaps more contacts come to my district office about this topic than any other topic, and I appreciate all the agencies here today. Thank you very much.

(00:22:58)

Thank you, CM Brewer. CM Hanif, followed by CM Hudson.

(00:23:00)

Thank you. Good morning, everyone. Thank you to Chairs Epstein and Feliz for holding today's important hearing and for including my bill, Int 0214-2026, on the agenda. Int 0214-2026 represents a true partnership between our community in District 39 and local government. This introduction is credited to the tireless organizing of the passionate volunteers of Good Neighbors of Park Slope. Thank you to Kathy and Lenore for being here today and to the many members who have already submitted testimony in support of this bill. Good Neighbors first approached my office months ago, wanting to turn their concerns around pedestrian and bike safety into action. Together we designed and ran a multilingual campaign across LinkNYC kiosks and introduced Int 0214-2026 as part of that civic engagement collaboration.

Int 0214-2026 largely codifies the rules of the road requirements that Citi Bike already shares with its riders, requiring micro-mobility operators to have their riders review the rules of the road before unlocking or activating a shared bike or scooter. New users would receive this information when they first use the system and existing users would review it at least once each year. The bill would also require rules of the road signage at micro-mobility share stations. Those rules include the basics we should all expect riders to know: yielding to pedestrians, obeying stop signs and traffic signals, riding in the direction of traffic, understanding where bikes and scooters can be ridden, using a bell, restrictions on earphones and operating at a safe speed.

As we go into this hearing featuring nearly two dozen bills and resolutions, I want to be crystal clear: any conversation about micro-mobility safety must meaningfully engage the more than 70,000 delivery workers who rely on these devices to make a living. Our City has created a crisis on our streets by meeting a ballooning on-demand delivery economy with infrastructure that has failed to keep pace with this new reality. The very real safety concerns we hear from constituents are also the result of political choices and years of inaction. That is why the onus of e-bike reforms cannot fall solely at the feet of a precarious workforce whose working conditions, schedules and routes are largely determined...

(00:25:37)

...by powerful tech companies. 53% of delivery workers surveyed by CUNY and Workers Justice Project reported a workplace-related injury. When your risk of injury on the job is about the same as a coin flip, that is not simply a cost of doing business. Tech oligarchs have built a business model around algorithms that present delivery workers with an impossible choice: speed your way there or risk deactivation. The current state of play is untenable. Every time we order in, an algorithm pressures this vulnerable workforce to literally hurl themselves into traffic in the name of shareholder value, and that has to stop.

We want to have our cake delivered by Grubhub and eat it too. Micro-mobility devices are increasingly becoming a staple on our streets. According to Transportation Alternatives, one in ten New Yorkers reports using one and 40% of people in bike lanes are riding them. We must thoughtfully regulate these devices and the companies that profit from their use. That conversation cannot begin with the loudest voices calling for incarceration, fines and confiscations. We must lead with robust City planning, fair scheduling, education, trade-ins, retrofits, compassion and dignity. I look forward to hearing from the agency staff before us, my constituents of Good Neighbors of Park Slope and members of the public as we have this important discussion about micro-mobility safety. Thank you.

(00:27:13)

Thank you, CM Hudson. CM Shahana Hanif, followed by CM Showmen.

(00:27:18)

Thank you so much, Chairs, for holding this important hearing today and for the opportunity to speak on my bills. Good morning, everyone. Int 0244-2026 would prohibit the sale and rental of Class 3 e-bikes. Any seller or lessor who violates the law, including companies like Whizz or Sumo, which many delivery workers use, would see a fine of up to $2,000. No penalties would be levied against any buyer or renter. Bikes that can be sold or rented can only go up to 20 miles per hour and this keeps many bikes that are popular with delivery workers, like the Fly 11, legal to sell and available for purchase.

The second bill, Preconsidered Int T2026-2361, would ban use of Class 3 e-bikes after a two-year implementation period, with civil penalties beginning in spring 2029. With a lengthy implementation period, workers would have time to utilize their existing bikes until the end of their useful life, at which point they could either buy a new bike compliant with Int 0244-2026, rent an e-bike, or add a speed limiter or lower-powered motor to effectively convert non-compliant bikes to a Class 2 e-bike. Importantly, there are no criminal penalties.

Together these bills meet the objective of removing the fastest bikes from our streets while providing ample opportunity for those who currently use Class 3 bikes for work to make necessary adjustments. As a governing body we have a responsibility to make our streets safer, but the bills we are hearing today are only part of the solution. Perhaps more importantly, we have a responsibility to protect the workers who use those streets every day. I worry that some of the rhetoric around this package risks putting the blame on delivery workers when they are often the ones facing the greatest risks and calling the loudest for greater safety and accountability. Delivery apps impose aggressive delivery times and threaten deactivation, pressuring workers to speed. We need to hold these companies accountable for the incentives they create, not just the workers navigating them. We cannot leave out the need for greater infrastructure investments like delivery hubs, charging stations and protected bike lanes that keep everyone safe, namely delivery workers and pedestrians.

When we take a both-and legislative approach rather than one that limits us to either-or, we can solve for the devices that are too fast for our streets and at the same time support the people who depend on them to make a living. These bills address one part of the problem. They are not the whole solution and our goal should be to build a city where pedestrians are safe, riders are safe and delivery workers are not forced to choose between their safety and their livelihood. Thank you. CM Schulman, followed by CM Restler. Thank you.

(00:29:55)

Thank you, Chair. Today I am here to speak in support of my bill, Int 0950-2026. Bikes and other micro-mobility devices have become an increasingly important part of everyday life in New York City. Not only are they critical to our transportation system, but they are also an essential tool for thousands of delivery workers who rely on them to make a living. But as the delivery industry has grown, so has the responsibility of the companies that organize and profit from these deliveries. Every day delivery services facilitate thousands of trips across our streets, yet we do not have the level of oversight we should have over the companies driving this system.

My legislation shifts accountability onto the apps and away from gig workers and would require delivery services that facilitate or arrange deliveries of goods in New York City to obtain a license from the Department of Consumer and Worker Protection. This will give the City stronger regulatory oversight, enforcement capabilities and conduct standards over app-based and traditional commercial delivery services operating across the five boroughs. At its core, my legislation is about making sure that the companies at the center of this industry are held accountable. If these companies are going to operate and profit from thousands of deliveries across the City every day, they should have responsibilities to match. I look forward to working with my colleagues to move this legislation forward. Thank you.

(00:31:21)

Thank you, CM Restler, followed by CM Maloney. Thank you so much, Chair Brewer...

(00:31:25)

...and Speaker Menin for this thoughtful hearing on this important issue. I want to just thank the commissioners for being here and their teams, and especially recognize Chief Obey. She and her team have been just particularly responsive and accessible to me and my district and we really appreciate their partnership, so thank you so much.

There are a hundred million delivery trips annually in New York City, hundreds of thousands of trips every single day. I tremendously value the work of delivery workers and I also really appreciate the service they provide to my neighbors and me on a daily basis. We have seen a significant rise in injuries and deaths associated with high-speed bikes and mopeds on the streets of New York City in recent years. While cars remain far and away the number one cause of injuries and fatalities on our streets, a true Vision Zero approach requires us to tackle safety from all angles. Like CM Brewer noted, issues relating to e-bikes and safety on our streets is one of the issues that I hear about most frequently from constituents. My dad, who is 80 and who is in great shape, rides a bike often and often talks to me about walking out the door of his home and silent e-bikes coming up on the sidewalks around corners that are unnerving, if not outright scary.

Delivery companies have unfortunately created an incentive model that rewards drivers who deliver goods as quickly as humanly possible. Those delivery apps profit more when drivers drive illegally. It endangers the delivery workers, not to mention the pedestrians and cyclists in our community. I have introduced legislation that requires delivery companies to track driver routes and report when they drive the wrong way down a one-way street or on the sidewalk. Drivers would have to take a road safety course if they have multiple violations in a week. We need to shift the paradigm and make sure that this is no longer a business model that encourages illegal driving practices. I also have another bill, Int 0389-2026, that would require all...

(00:33:38)

...third-party food delivery services to ensure that mopeds used by their workers are legal and properly registered before they hit the streets. These vehicles are required to be registered and, just like Lyft and Uber ensure that their ride-share drivers are in vehicles that are properly registered and licensed, delivery apps should have the same responsibility. Delivery workers have incredibly difficult and dangerous jobs and indeed it is one of the most dangerous jobs in the City of New York and we rely heavily on them. I am committed to making sure that these bills do not unfairly penalize those workers or lead to wrongful deactivation. My focus, and I believe this Committee's focus, is on regulating the giant corporations that are profiting from these workers. I want to thank my colleagues, especially Chair Brewer, for the hearing today and look forward to a conversation that I hope is productive and leads to a new and better regulatory system for making our streets safer for all of us.

(00:34:36)

Thank you. Thank you.

(00:34:42)

CM Abreu: Hearing, and one of the most affordable, eco-friendly and convenient ways to travel through New York City is riding a bike or micro-mobility device. As New Yorkers turn to micro-mobility to get from point A to point B, our infrastructure simply has not kept up the pace. This summer we experienced tragic fatalities, making this more urgent now than ever.

Franciselva Behe, 39 years old, and Metro Center... Elko, 35 years old, tragically died in a head-on collision in the bike lane on the Queensboro Bridge. You know that this is just one out of many accidents and crashes that we have had on this bridge. One week later, Gabrielle... of Bensonhurst was killed on Centre Street after coming off the Brooklyn Bridge bike lane, not so far from where we are sitting right now. He was only 17 years old and was on his way to meet a career counselor and apply for summer jobs. Less than two weeks ago, another 15-year-old, Daria Surkov, was killed at East 14th Street and First Avenue. A truck turning right struck the electric Citi Bike she was riding with a friend. Earlier this week, a 50-year-old woman was killed while cycling on 34th Street in Midtown.

So far, 20 cyclists have been killed — double from this point last year. We know that vehicles, cars, are actually the highest leading cause of death in this City and we need to make sure that all of our streets are safe for cyclists and pedestrians and also micro-mobility riders. So the City Council and the Mayor have responded with urgency, issuing cease and desist orders against retailers selling illegal high-speed devices, and a package of bills that we are hearing today to address registration and delivery platform accountability, because we are sick and tired of people having to be forced to drive at such high speeds just to make a living.

These bills are in response to a proliferation of high-speed, oversized devices that account for most of our crashes. But again, I want to emphasize that the largest leading cause of death is caused by vehicles, by cars. And please, please keep it down in the chambers. If you are making sound, you will be escorted out of these chambers. Consider this your first warning.

(00:37:00)

And again, after all these... that is why my bill, T2026-2310, will require the Department of Transportation to install traffic calming measures in at least 50 bike lanes. We have been advocating for years and we have had the Mayor's commitment for installation of daylighting to make it safer for all of us. So I look forward to this conversation and we look forward to starting with a defined set of bike lane intersections. This bill allows real-world data on where and what works. So New Yorkers should not have to choose between their physical safety and an affordable, sustainable way to travel. Thank you so much.

(00:37:35)

Thank you. CM Maloney. Hello. My bill is focused on the pedestrian safety component of this package. I am grateful that we are attacking this issue from all angles, and this bill would add, at key intersections — 500 in total — prioritizing school districts, to make sure that pedestrians are aware when they are in a bike lane. Thank you.

(00:38:17)

Thank you. We will now proceed with testimony. Before we proceed with testimony from the administration, let me just make sure I am recognizing all of my colleagues: CM Epstein, Feliz, Brewer, Hudson, Won, Dinowitz, Louis, Hanif, Restler, De La Rosa online, and a majority of the web... Banks. Thank you. We will now proceed with testimony from the administration and I will turn it over to the committee counsel to give the oath.

(00:38:56)

Thank you. You may begin when you are ready and please state your name for the record before you do so.

(00:39:04)

Good morning. I am Mike Flynn, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Transportation. Good morning, Speaker Menin, Chair Feliz and members of the Committees on Transportation and Infrastructure, Consumer and Worker Protection and Public Safety. With me today is Madeline Labadie, my Chief of Staff. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on behalf of Mayor Mamdani about micro-mobility in New York City and the administration's work to enhance safety for micro-mobility riders, pedestrians and all road users.

The use of electric micro-mobility devices such as e-bikes and scooters has dramatically increased in recent years. One of my top priorities is creating safe and reliable infrastructure that supports growing ridership and allows even more New Yorkers to feel comfortable getting around on bikes. With record growth in bike ridership, including more than 600,000 cycling trips taken in the City each day and an increasing share of riders choosing to ride bikes or e-scooters, we know we need to think holistically to meet this growth while improving safety for everyone on our streets. When used safely and legally, bikes offer affordable, sustainable and convenient options for a range of New Yorkers, from families to delivery workers, tens of thousands of whom rely on micro-mobility for their livelihoods. The more we can shift New Yorkers to more sustainable, more space-efficient options, the safer and healthier our communities will be and the less congestion we all suffer. These devices have made travel easier, improved accessibility and provided new economic opportunities. But with this shift in the way people get around our City, we need infrastructure, laws and public education to keep up.

We want New York City to be the global model for what safe, legal micro-mobility can be and to provide New Yorkers with more options to get around without needing to own a car. One challenge is that the evolving market of micro-mobility devices often leaves riders and consumers confused. It is difficult for consumers to know the difference between legal e-bikes, illegal e-bikes, mopeds, motorcycles, et cetera. The law includes three classes of bikes right now. Two of them have max speeds of 20 miles per hour and the third has a max speed of 25 miles per hour. Any e-bike that goes above these speeds is illegal. Yet many consumers are misled by deceptive marketing practices by retailers who advertise and sell illegal products. This is why we recently joined Mayor Mamdani in the issuance of cease and desist letters to 42 retailers found to be selling illegal e-bikes to New Yorkers online.

While nearly 90% of traffic deaths involve cars and trucks, micro-mobility-related fatalities and injuries are a serious concern. Two of the biggest factors in the...

(00:41:51)

...severity of a traffic crash are the speed and weight of a vehicle, which is why the proliferation of faster, heavier illegal e-bikes and stand-up scooters is such an alarming trend on our streets. More than half of all riders who die in a traffic crash are riding illegal devices capable of going at high speed. This is dangerous and unacceptable. Earlier this year, two lives were lost when an illegal high-speed scooter capable of going more than 50 miles per hour collided with a cyclist on the Queensboro Bridge. This should have never happened and the companies that illegally sell these products must be held accountable.

While we focus on reining in the supply of these devices, we are also continuing our educational efforts. We distribute the chart included in my printed testimony to the public to explain the differences between various devices, including which ones are legal and which ones are illegal. Emerging technology is continuing to change the landscape of how New Yorkers get around the City and we are focused on creatively and strategically meeting the moment during this time of rapid change on our streets. We are embracing the new opportunities presented by micro-mobility while addressing challenges too — pedestrian, rider and fire safety — in a safe and equitable way.

First and foremost, we are focused on roadway safety and striving towards our Vision Zero goals. Recent high-profile fatal crashes and serious injuries have reinforced the urgency of this work. We are ramping up the installation of innovative street redesigns that reimagine our streets to prioritize pedestrians, mass transit and cycling — interventions that are making our streets safer and the planet greener. We are improving micro-mobility infrastructure by expanding our network of protected bike lanes, including wider protected bike lanes and the establishment of new pedestrianized space. We are also exploring other treatments to enhance street safety through design, including signal timing modifications, expanded outdoor bike parking, cargo bike corrals, loading zones for e-micro-mobility and bike boulevards to accommodate these modes. We know infrastructure works and can see the safety impact wherever we put in proven design interventions. These designs also make streets safer for all users. Protected and standard bike lanes in New York City, for example, have been shown to reduce injury risk for cyclists by over 30%.

Along with design interventions, we are also working to address fire risks from micro-mobility batteries. We are doing this by implementing fire-safe battery swapping cabinets on public sidewalks and plazas. These cabinets and the batteries associated with them will be certified to the highest nationally recognized fire safety standard and will include proactive monitoring of battery health along with fire containment features. Over 100 delivery workers participated in the pilot and one shared that the new infrastructure and certified batteries gave them peace of mind as they kept their family and neighbors safe.

We have also been taking meaningful steps towards our mission to provide the safe, equitable and sustainable movement of goods and people citywide through our freight mobility and sustainable delivery work. We continue to encourage companies to use commercial cargo bicycles to make local and last-mile deliveries across the City and in recent years authorized the use of e-cargo bikes along with key safety standards. Cargo bikes have a direct benefit on safety and sustainability as each bike replaces a truck or van that would otherwise deliver those goods to the final customer.

In addition to freight mobility, we are also taking action to hold third-party delivery companies accountable for their impact on street safety and provide training and resources for delivery workers. Roadway safety is important for all New Yorkers and for delivery workers. The roadway is their workplace. Our efforts, with support from our strong partnerships with delivery worker stakeholders, improve street safety and simultaneously improve the safety and dignity of delivery work. For too long, third-party delivery companies had, through algorithmic management and the threat of deactivation, created working conditions that lead to dangerous cycling behavior. As such, we are committed to improving street safety in ways that take into account the pressures faced by delivery workers.

In this spirit, we continue to build our Sustainable Delivery Unit to address the street safety challenges associated with the rapid growth of on-demand delivery services. Our Sustainable Delivery Unit works to strengthen oversight of delivery apps, enhance safety for delivery workers and the public through education and outreach and analyze the impacts of the delivery industry on our streets. Through DOT's training portal developed by this team, thousands of delivery workers have already taken the bicycle safety course focused on the rules of the road and safe operation of bikes. We continue to make strides towards our goal of ensuring all delivery workers have taken our safety training. Finally, we are also developing policy to ensure that all delivery service companies transition their workforce towards legal and compliant devices. As dangerous devices proliferate, these companies must do their part to ensure their deliveries are completed on safe devices.

Turning to the legislation before the Council today. First, Int 0078-2026, sponsored by CM Brewer. This Bill would require third-party delivery services licensed by the City to share granular travel data for all delivery trips made by their contracted delivery workers. We support this Bill as requiring trip-level data from delivery platforms will bolster the administration's ability to examine the transportation and street safety impacts of the delivery worker environment. With DOT's mission to provide for the safe, equitable and sustainable movement of people and goods, we also recommend amending the Bill to grant access to this travel data to assess the industry's impact on street safety for all street users, not just delivery workers. We also recommend that the Bill be amended to include crash data, which would further support our efforts to understand the industry's impact on street safety.

Next, Int 0095-2026, sponsored by CM Brewer. This Bill would require DOT to develop materials containing information related to the registration, inspection, operation and traffic safety requirements for mopeds and would require moped retailers to distribute such materials at the point of sale. We are proud to have supported passage of the state law to require ownership information at the point of sale and have found it to be effective thus far. DOT already promotes a robust suite of educational materials, safety information and events to help people ride mopeds more safely. We support this Bill and look forward to working with our sister agency and the Council to strengthen ongoing outreach efforts.

Next, Int 0110-2026, sponsored by CM Brooks-Powers. This Bill would expand commercial delivery safety and training requirements to cover all two-wheel devices. Cyclists using bikes, e-bikes and cargo bikes are already required to receive safety gear and occupational safety training and we support the need to expand this coverage for workers who use mopeds, motorcycles and scooters, which would further strengthen safety requirements covering more delivery devices used by workers. We have suggestions for the safety requirements outlined in the proposed legislation and we look forward to working with the Council to strengthen safety standards.

Next, Int 0214-2026, sponsored by CM Hanif. This Bill would require bikeshare operators to display rules of the road on their mobile applications and on physical stations. The...

(00:49:28)

Operators would be required to ensure that users review the rules at least once per year before activating or unlocking a device. We believe that our bike and micro mobility share partners play an important role in educating riders and support the intent of the Bill. Road rules are already posted on every Citi Bike kiosk and inside the basket of every Citi Bike. Even so, DOT believes that app platforms are best suited for educating riders. All of our partners include safety information and road rules within their apps currently, but we look forward to discussing with the Council how those can be strengthened.

Next, Int 0244, sponsored by CM Hudson. This Bill would prohibit the sale and rental of Class 3 bicycles with electric assist. Class 3 bikes can create additional safety challenges compared to lighter and slower e-bikes. In the rest of the state, all vehicles capable of travelling over 20 miles per hour are required to have a license and registration to operate. We support prohibiting the sale and rental of these devices to help reduce their prevalence on the street. We will be pursuing state legislation to create e-bike regulations consistent with national and international safety standards. To accomplish this, we will work with advocates in New York State to advance a regulatory framework that transitions New Yorkers and delivery workers away from devices capable of traveling more than 20 miles per hour. We will also continue to work with delivery workers through outreach and education efforts to incentivize riders to transition to devices that ride below 20 miles per hour. We support this Bill and look forward to ongoing efforts to strengthen regulations in the e-bike marketplace.

Next, Int 0095, sponsored by CM Restler. This Bill would require third party food delivery services to verify the registration of mopeds used by food delivery workers. Mopeds are already required to be registered at the point of sale and we support the intent of this Bill, as we want to ensure third party delivery apps are held accountable to also verify registration while also working with our sister agency to mitigate potential worker protection concerns.

Next, Int 0389, sponsored by CM Brooks-Powers. This Bill requires reporting on targeted traffic enforcement operations by the police department. We maintain a strong partnership with the NYPD on data that supports street safety measures. We defer to the NYPD on the details of the Bill.

Next, Int 0950, sponsored by CM... This Bill would require delivery services that facilitate or arrange for the delivery of goods in the City to obtain a license. We support the intent of a more level playing field among delivery service companies, which would include all major third party delivery services that rely on these devices to obtain a license, in an effort to comprehensively address micro mobility safety and the delivery industry. We defer to our sister agency for details.

Next, Int 0905, sponsored by Chair Abreu. This Bill would establish a trade-in program for Class 3 bicycles with electric assist and vehicles that resemble but do not legally qualify as Class 1 or Class 2 e-bikes. While we support the Bill's intent to encourage New Yorkers to replace unsafe and illegal vehicles with compliant micro mobility devices, we have concerns with the Bill as written. Standing up a program like this is very resource intensive and a narrower approach that targets the most dangerous illegal devices could prove a greater impact on street safety. As we finalize a full evaluation of last year's e-bike trade-in program, we look forward to sharing lessons learned to inform a program with Council support to best enhance street safety for all road users.

Next, Int 0987, sponsored by Chair Abreu. This Bill would require the use of micro mobility dynamometers to test micro mobility devices operating in the City, followed by a report of data gathered through the testing. We support the Bill's intent to ensure all riders use safe, compliant devices. We are interested in testing any technology that can help increase the use of safe devices on our streets. At the same time, we have heard concerns about equity and implementation and we would defer on those concerns. We look forward to working with the Council and the NYPD to develop best practices for implementation.

Next, Int 0988, sponsored by Chair Abreu. This Bill would prohibit the advertisement of vehicles required to be registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles as powered bicycles or powered mobility devices. We support this Bill to prohibit misleading advertisements, but the current draft of the Bill only targets the advertisement of legal devices, given that they must be registered. We think it is also important to expand the Bill to also prohibit advertising illegal devices as e-bikes or other legal mobility devices, such as in the case of the most recent crash in front of One Centre Street. These illegal devices cannot be registered and therefore would not be captured by the Bill as drafted.

Next, Int 0989, sponsored by Chair Abreu. This Bill would require the City's bikeshare operator to report safety incidents involving their devices, followed by a report published to the web. Citi Bike is now an integral part of New York City's transportation system. Given its growing role in our transportation system, understanding how it contributes to the safety landscape is critical to enhancing safety on our streets. We support the intent of this Bill, but understand there are operational challenges to collecting some of this data for the system operator, such as incident data being self-reported by riders. Citi Bike's existing program agreement already includes robust requirements to report known safety incidents.

Next, Int 0994, sponsored by CM Brewer. This Bill requires third party food delivery services to maintain liability insurance. We support efforts to ensure that delivery services carry appropriate insurance to protect New Yorkers when there are incidents on the job. Workers and pedestrians should not be left to pay for injuries and damages caused by collisions on the job. Delivery apps need to acknowledge their role and bear the responsibility for the externalities of their business.

Next, Int 1004, sponsored by CM Maloney. This Bill requires DOT to paint signs on street corners alerting pedestrians to look up at incoming traffic. The Bill also requires DOT to provide educational materials on street safety to schools. This is work that we already strive to do and we would be happy to collaborate with the Council on strengthening our outreach and educational efforts. Pedestrians are our most vulnerable population. Everything we do prioritizes pedestrian safety and we completely understand the need.

(00:56:14)

To make sure everyone on... Ken, sergeants, identify who is interrupting the Commissioner and please escort them out.

(00:56:18)

Chambers. Thank you very much. We completely understand the need to make sure everyone on the roadway is aware of their surroundings. We already deploy data-proven interventions and our efforts are working, with research showing that extremely few fatalities are caused by distracted walking. Although we support the intent of this Bill, we have concerns with how this tool fits within our existing street safety toolkit. We always welcome input from Council Members on any suggested locations to explore safety enhancements.

Next, Int 1021, sponsored by Chair Abreu. This Bill would require third party delivery services to submit an annual safety report including crash data. Third party delivery services will also be required to submit a safety plan with any initial or renewal application. New Yorkers deserve a workplace where their safety and dignity is the top priority, including the delivery cyclists who serve our City year round. As mentioned, our mandatory safety course for delivery

(00:57:17)

workers is proving successful and we continue to empower delivery cyclists to make safe trips through direct outreach, along with delivery worker education and outreach. We must continue strengthening delivery app accountability and we support this Bill as it enhances these efforts. We look forward to working with the Council and our sister agency to ensure meaningful street safety measures.

Next, Int 1052, sponsored by CM Paladino. This Bill requires NYPD to include data on micro mobility devices in crash reporting. We support the intent of this Bill as we already coordinate with NYPD to include mobility crashes in open data and look forward to working with the Council to ensure our data continues to be reflective of all road users.

Next, Int 1066, sponsored by CM... This Bill requires DOT to install traffic calming devices in bicycle lanes at no less than 50 intersections throughout the City. We share the Council's goal to enhance safety through a variety of traffic calming devices and design changes that together make streets safer by encouraging slower speeds for cyclists. We support the Bill's intent as we are already taking unprecedented steps in our safety engineering efforts to install these devices and look forward to discussions with the Council to strategize initiatives that meet our shared goal to support safe and accessible cycling practices.

Next, Int 0787, sponsored by Chair Abreu. This Bill requires delivery services to submit data for each trip, followed by a study to determine the street safety impacts, and would then promulgate rules establishing safe delivery standards based on those findings. Street safety is our priority. We support the Bill, but find more value if this Bill is placed with DOT. We look forward to ongoing efforts to strengthen our understanding of delivery worker travel patterns based on trip level data.

Next, Preconsidered T2026-2361, sponsored by CM Hudson. This Bill would prohibit the use of Class 3 e-bikes in New York City. We are always thinking critically about how regulatory efforts could mitigate street safety concerns. As previously stated, we are pursuing state legislation to create e-bike regulations consistent with national and international safety standards. The administration needs more time to analyze the Bill and connect with stakeholders before we formalize our position. We look forward to working with the Council on how best to partner together on these efforts to ensure appropriate safeguards are in place for workers.

Next, Preconsidered T2026-2587, sponsored by CM Restler. This Bill requires the installation of traffic safety tracking technology on devices used by delivery workers with a progressive penalty structure. Safety is our north star and we are always interested in exploring new technologies that support our mission. But as previously mentioned, we want to hold delivery apps accountable for incentivizing unsafe riding behavior. We defer to our sister agency on the details and look forward to future conversations on how best to promote safe riding behavior.

Lastly, Preconsidered T2026-2590, sponsored by Chair Abreu. This Bill requires the installation of sidewalk riding detection technology on the bikes and scooters that are part of self-service share systems, with violators facing a progressive penalty structure. E-bike and e-scooter riders must abide by the same traffic laws, rules and regulations applicable to drivers. Riders are permitted on arterial and local streets throughout the City and must use designated bike lanes when available. Riding is prohibited on certain bridges, expressways and highways unless a designated bicycle path exists. In general, riders are not permitted to operate on sidewalks, but we do have locations across the City that allow for sidewalk riding as indicated by official signage. We support the Bill's intent so that riders abide by these rules, but based on our research, existing technology cannot effectively distinguish between sidewalk and road surface and can cause safety issues for riders in the road if the technology mistakes them for sidewalk riders, slowing the device while in traffic. We share the Council's concern with unsafe riding behavior and look forward to working with the sponsor to discuss existing and reliable safety tools to address this concern.

In conclusion, every death or serious injury on our streets is an avoidable tragedy affecting not only the victim, but their families, friends and colleagues. Since I began serving as Commissioner, I have met many New Yorkers who lost loved ones to traffic violence or were themselves injured in a crash. Hearing their stories and understanding the long-term pain and trauma that never really go away makes these issues not just academic, but so very tangible. It underscores the importance of our work together here today towards Vision Zero. Likewise, every member of our team that works on Vision Zero and street safety projects carries with them a profound sense of responsibility to not only honor the memory of those who have been lost with aggressive, data-driven action, but to prevent the next tragedy from happening.

(01:02:32)

Vision Zero works. It is saving lives. Compared to the same point in the year before Vision Zero was implemented, traffic deaths are down nearly 30%. But this is about more than numbers and percentages. These are real people, real families. That 30% reduction in traffic deaths means more than 50 individuals are alive who would not have been since Vision Zero began. That is 50 individuals, 50 families and many more times more neighbors, coworkers and classmates of those individuals, all of whom will be spared from tragedy. We are encouraged by the progress we are making at DOT, but acknowledge that there is much more to be done. I would like to thank the Council for the opportunity to testify before you today and I look forward to partnering together on meaningful legislation to help shape evolving micro mobility trends in a safe and impactful way. We would now be happy to pass to the next testimony. Thank you.

(01:03:28)

Thank you, Commissioner Flynn. Good morning, Chairs Epstein and Abreu, and members of the Committee on Consumer and Worker Protection, the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure and the Committee on Public Safety. I am Sam Levine, Commissioner of the Department of Consumer and Worker Protection. I am joined this morning by our Chief of Staff and Deputy Commissioner for External Affairs, Carlos Ortiz. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today before the committees on micro mobility in New York City and related legislation.

The New York City Department of Consumer and Worker Protection is the nation's leading municipal enforcement agency charged with delivering economic justice. In the last nine months, the Mamdani Administration has demonstrated New York City's commitment to refuse to allow multibillion-dollar companies to rake in record profits on the backs of New Yorkers. We have been at the forefront of this all-hands-on-deck effort, protecting New Yorkers from corporate tricks and traps that make their lives harder. I am proud to report that through our programs, protections and policies, we have secured more than $1 billion on behalf of New Yorkers thus far in 2026.

During this administration, I have made engaging New Yorkers a priority across all of the services and programs that we offer as an agency. We hear directly from New Yorkers on the issues that matter most to them. This includes direct outreach to consumers, to small businesses, to workers and partnerships with our sister agencies such as my colleagues at the Department of Transportation. In 2026, we have conducted nearly 800 outreach events and have engaged with nearly 200,000 New Yorkers through direct public awareness efforts and financial empowerment programming. We remain committed and steadfast in our promise to the communities of our City that

(01:05:12)

We are here as a partner and ally and stand ready to champion their rights. Now turning to the topic of today's hearing. At the start of this year we celebrated the passage of laws to advance protections for delivery workers, including tipping protections and an expansion of the minimum pay rate. Our workers' tipping report, which showed two major engineered design tricks to make it harder for consumers to tip and drove down worker pay by more than half a billion dollars, exemplified the need for these laws. More recent reports show that these new tipping protections have lifted workers' total earnings on delivery by more than a hundred million dollars and are on course to hit $184 million by the end of the year. Earlier this year we secured more than $5 million from three major delivery apps and reinstatement for up to 10,000 wrongfully terminated workers.

This work is only accelerating. Just last week we announced a historic $131.5 million enforcement action against Doordash, the largest worker protection enforcement in the history of New York City, for systemic violations of New York City's delivery worker laws. More than $115 million will go directly to over 26,000 delivery workers. By arming workers with tools to report trip data directly to us, we are both investing in worker power and ensuring that these massive violations will not recur in our five boroughs.

Now, a common tactic by companies, often to distract from their track record of mistreating workers, is to pit workers' rights against street safety. Nothing could be further from the truth. I speak with delivery workers all the time and they consistently describe the pressure to complete more orders in less time or risk deactivation. As CM Hudson said earlier, no workers should have to choose between their safety and their livelihood. That is why the Mamdani Administration was proud to support and will be vigorously enforcing Local Law 34 of 2026, which puts an end to arbitrary deactivations in New York City.

Today the Council is considering numerous bills aimed at strengthening street safety and we look forward to a thoughtful discussion of each. But our administration — and I speak for all the agencies here — believes strongly that the basic deactivation protections provided by Local Law 34 are a critical part of any street safety effort. No amount of training, equipment requirements or monitoring can make our streets meaningfully safer if workers are still operating under constant pressure to race against the clock or risk losing their jobs. Street safety requires not only addressing how delivery workers ride, but the incentives and pressures that shape how they are required to work.

Turning now to our enforcement efforts: we enforce various laws that protect consumers from the sale of unsafe and illegal micromobility devices. We aim to keep our City free from these devices as the lead enforcement agency for Local Laws 39, 49 and 50, and we also actively enforce against the sale of oversized and overpowered motorized scooters and illegal mopeds. Following the passage of these laws we sprang into action, conducting enforcement sweeps of retailers across the five boroughs and working swiftly to bring them into compliance. We continue to conduct regular proactive enforcement in this space. Just this past summer, our inspectors and attorneys conducted a comprehensive sweep of micromobility retailers across the City, working to ensure continued compliance with our laws. Since we began enforcing these laws in 2023, we have conducted nearly 1,000 inspections and issued more than 460 summonses to brick-and-mortar businesses for violations of Local Law 39, Local Law 49 and the motorized scooter law. In 2026 we issued over 85 cease and desist orders and 41 summonses to online sellers for violations of Local Law 39. We have also targeted eight locations for sealing, sealed three of them and brought five into compliance prior to having to seal them.

Turning to today's legislation and starting with Int 0078-2026: this Bill requires licensed delivery services to submit data for each trip made in the City. Our administration supports this legislation to require third-party food delivery services to submit data regularly. However, we and our sister agencies are aligned that DOT, which is best positioned to oversee the City's street safety laws and indeed already does, should receive this data. The administration looks forward to working with the Council on this legislation.

Turning to Int 0244-2026, which would prohibit the sale and rental of Class B e-bikes: we support this Bill, which would ban the sale and rental of certain throttle e-bikes with higher speed capacity. However, we have operational concerns related to online and field enforcement challenges, as not all products accurately post or specify speed information. We look forward to hearing from stakeholders today and working with the Council and our sister agencies on this Bill.

Turning to Int 0095-2026: this would prohibit third-party food delivery services from permitting any food delivery worker hired, retained or engaged by the third-party food delivery service to utilize a moped unless the delivery service has verified registration of the moped. Our administration supports the intent of this legislation to require third-party food delivery services to verify moped registration. However, we have concerns that the Bill as written could result in delivery workers being unfairly deactivated by delivery apps. Unless there are reasonable guardrails in place, workers should be given notice and an opportunity to address any issues with their vehicle registration and the chance to get back to work once this is addressed. We recommend adding language requiring warnings and other progressive discipline measures to ensure workers are not permanently deactivated arbitrarily, and providing for an extended effective date. We look forward to working with the Council and our sister agencies to establish a balanced approach that addresses both street safety priorities and workers' rights and their need to earn a living.

Turning to Int 0214-2026: this Bill would require delivery services that facilitate or arrange for the delivery of goods in the City to obtain a business license, which would set forth conditions on such a license and enforcement options. We support the intent of this Bill to expand the coverage of its third-party food delivery service license. However, we recommend that we tailor the Bill to require licensing for companies that engage contracted delivery workers as independent contractors, so that we focus on the appropriate companies and do not unintentionally burden small businesses. We have started 2026 with aggressive enforcement against powerful corporations that are exploiting workers and we stand ready to continue that fight.

Turning to Int 0988-2026, which would prohibit the advertisement for sale, lease, rent or distribution of any vehicle that can be registered with New York State as a street-legal bike or scooter: the Bill requires us to develop and distribute information on unauthorized e-bikes and scooters to retailers to post and offer to consumers. We support this Bill, which prohibits the advertisement for sale, lease or rental. However, there are policy and fiscal concerns about the breadth of outreach contemplated by this Bill and the significant investment that would be required to conduct it. We look forward to working to ensure that any new campaign is coordinated with the appropriate agencies who have similar campaigns and have additional subject matter expertise. We look forward to working with the Council on refinements to this Bill.

Turning to Int 0989-2026: this Bill would require certain third-party food delivery services to maintain insurance to cover liability

(01:13:28)

that arises from accidents involving a delivery worker on an e-bike, scooter or illegal moped while the delivery worker is making a delivery or is available to make a delivery for the third-party food delivery service. We support the intent of this Bill to require apps to maintain liability coverage for accidents involving a delivery worker on micromobility devices. We look forward to hearing more from stakeholders on this Bill today.

Turning to Int 1021-2026, which would require third-party food delivery services to submit an annual safety report: the administration supports this Bill but believes these reports and plans should be provided to DOT, which is best positioned to leverage that information for street safety enforcement and overall strategic planning efforts.

Turning now to Preconsidered Bill T2026-2361: this would prohibit the operation of Class B e-bikes, require that violators receive a warning for the first violation and escalating civil penalties for subsequent violations. We share the Council's goal to rid our streets of unsafe micromobility devices. However, we have significant concerns about unintended consequences that would most heavily impact delivery workers, many of whom are immigrants with limited English proficiency and other vulnerabilities. Delivery workers could face losing their livelihoods as well as increased interactions with law enforcement at a time when many are especially fearful of such interactions, and this could also lead to confiscation of the device they use every day to earn a living. We look forward to working with the Council to improve street safety while balancing the needs of some of our City's most essential yet vulnerable workers.

Turning now to Preconsidered Bill T2026-2587: this would require third-party delivery services to use tracking technology to detect when certain delivery workers engage in unsafe traffic behaviors while making a delivery or while available to make a delivery. Generally, we have concerns about the idea of requiring constant electronic surveillance of workers who are primarily immigrants. We also have concerns that as drafted, this Bill could lead to delivery workers being unfairly deactivated by delivery apps. We look forward to working with the Council to further street safety and worker safety goals while limiting unintended consequences that flow from this legislation.

In conclusion, I want to thank the Council sincerely for the opportunity to testify before these committees on today's legislation and for the Council's attention to these vital issues. Our administration looks forward to hearing from stakeholders today on the impact of these bills and we look forward to collaborating closely with the Council during the legislative process. I welcome any questions you have and now turn things over to our Police Department. Thank

(01:16:21)

you. We look forward to answering any questions you might have.

(01:16:25)

Thank you. We will hear from Speaker Julie Menin. So much. Sorry, Madam Speaker, let me recognize CM Nurse, CM Marte, CM Banks, Public Advocate Williams, Paladino and all.

(01:16:39)

Madam Speaker, thank you so much. I want to start with the fact that in 2013, the City Council passed a law that required all delivery workers to wear a vest to identify themselves as commercial workers. I am here with CM Brewer's bill to make it clear that the law applies to all delivery workers, including those that work for third-party apps. Yet if you were to ask the average New Yorker, they will tell you they have never heard of this law and they have almost never seen a delivery worker wearing the required vest. That is because there seems to be zero enforcement. So the question is, both for the NYPD and since you are both responsible for enforcement of our micromobility safety laws: why is there no enforcement of this law?

(01:17:35)

Thank you, Speaker. We very much share the priority of ensuring that delivery workers are operating safely, both for themselves and for others out there. We agree as well that the delivery landscape has continued evolving in terms of workers using different kinds of devices beyond just bicycles, and we are supportive of the legislation to expand that. We are absolutely open to further conversations around the enforcement side and how we can keep improving the delivery worker landscape.

(01:18:14)

Okay, I just have a question for the commissioner. So when you say you are open to conversations on enforcement, will you then commit now

(01:18:20)

to enforce the Council's law on this topic? We are committed

(01:18:25)

to enforcing any laws on the books and I am happy to look closer at whether there are gaps and how we can continue partnering on enforcement. With regard to the corporate side, enforcement against the employers, I would very much defer to the relevant agency. With regard to the street-level enforcement, I do think that the message to the patrol officers on the street

(01:18:50)

is that we are prioritizing conduct that is most dangerous. I understand the concern you are raising, Speaker. But again, I do think that the critical point is identifying dangerous behavior. Officers are directed to take enforcement action. Okay, so will the agency also then commit to enforcing this Council law?

(01:19:13)

We will certainly look at it and prepare additional guidance for the officers. Again, there is always going to be a question of prioritizing on the street in terms of enforcement — that is inescapable. But I understand what you are saying, Speaker, and we will one hundred percent take that back to look at additional training and to make sure our officers understand all the tools available to them.

(01:19:36)

Absolutely. I mean, the Council has now passed several laws on this and no one knows anything about them. We pass them for a reason. So one of the reasons for this hearing is to get the commitment from the agencies to actually enforce the current laws we have on the books that are not being enforced. We were — one hundred percent, can I take that back? Okay. And so I would like a commitment from both agencies in writing to us. We really want to — I just do not want to have more conversations, okay. And I am sure CM Brewer is going to expand upon that in her questioning as well. Secondly, how many tickets and citations has NYPD issued regarding micromobility infractions this year and how does that compare to last year and to the year before that?

(01:20:23)

So, moving violations year-to-date 2026: e-bikes, 10,558 versus 9,324; standup scooters, 140 versus 300; mopeds, 1,807 versus 1,624; motorcycles, 49 versus 367. These are moving violations for what we consider to be the most serious offenses.

(01:20:52)

Okay, can you provide all of the data in writing to the committees? That would be helpful. Yes. Commissioner Flynn, I sent you a letter urging age verification for Citi Bike and made clear there are numerous options on the table. Obviously you could use a biometric system. The letter was very clear that it does not involve utilizing facial recognition technology — you do not need to use facial recognition technology. There are so many other ways to do this. We currently have the SAFE Act being passed at the state level on social media companies. Both the New York Attorney General and the Governor identify numerous ways for age verification. Earlier this month there was a fatal accident involving two teenage girls, one of whom was 15. Since that accident I have not gotten a response to my letter, so I want to understand what the agency is going to do in terms of this issue.

(01:21:45)

Thank you, Speaker. The safety of young New Yorkers is our top priority and certainly where we are most focused — on the streets being safe, but also

(01:21:54)

online safety, as you noted. We do appreciate Lyft's efforts to protect young riders and to explore age-appropriate access to Citi Bike that preserves data privacy, security, accuracy and equity, and as an administration we are committed to that. I know that there are very productive discussions going on right now with Lyft and we are exploring all possible avenues to achieve both goals: street safety and online safety for young New Yorkers. Okay. And I should clarify — we are doing a bill on this. The bill is not ready to be released today. It will be released in the coming weeks and that will mandate an age verification system. I just wanted to make sure that I expressed that. How would the administration assess its on-street enforcement of our micromobility laws thus far this year and do you think your enforcement efforts have been successful? I guess NYPD will start. I will speak briefly and then turn it over to Chief Obey. Obviously there has been stepped-up enforcement and the numbers that were described earlier speak to that. Obviously there is always more work to do. We are following the data both in terms of key locations and key corridors where there is a concentration of accidents, injuries and fatalities. We are acting in response to that. I think it is a very data-driven approach. We talk about precision policing in other contexts. This is about precision when it comes to traffic safety. Obviously there is always more work to do.

(01:23:32)

And every accident is one too many. Every fatality obviously is one too many. But we are very focused on this issue and with that I will turn it over to the Chief.

(01:23:42)

Good morning, everyone. So enforcement decisions are made this way: we focus on high-visibility corridors citywide. There are 15 other corridors in all boroughs, and they touch the... I am just reviewing data going back four years. Prior to 2024, nine corridors citywide were identified. In 2024, that has since expanded to 15. An example of one such corridor is Ocean Parkway in the confines of the 66th precinct, where we had three fatalities all over in 2025, and this was caused by a speeding operator. We typically direct our resources along corridors where we see spikes in our fatalities, injuries and collisions. In this particular case, there were fatalities along Ocean Parkway in 2025. We have zero as we sit here today. Total collisions are down along that corridor, total injuries are down, total corridor moving violations are up and vision zero movers are up.

As it pertains to micro mobility devices, the first thing we do — we will speak about that also at length — is a point of principal initiatives addressing unsafe motorized devices at point locations, addressing our retailers. We started that work in two phases in 2021. The initial focus was on mopeds. This year we focused on high-powered Class E bikes and scooters. As of September 21, we visited 71 storefronts. 63 were inspected, 90 bikes seized from those locations, corresponding summonses issued. Inspections for the most part found broad compliance, and follow-up visits will continue. We work hand in hand with those locations where we distributed flyers, and I will...

(01:25:46)

I would echo everything the chief said. We have a really great working relationship both at the staff and leadership level. We use the data and really let the data drive all of our efforts. Enforcement is one piece of that, but really we are taking a comprehensive approach — that is enforcement, education, infrastructure and regulation. I do believe that it is working. I believe that we are seeing the trends going in the right direction. Overall, year to date, we have seen 151 traffic fatalities. That is down nine from this point last year and it is down 43 from 2024 at this point. We have seen an uptick, as was noted, in e-bike fatalities, and that certainly underscores the importance of the work.

(01:26:35)

We are all doing here today together. What data does NYPD have on collisions between pedestrians and e-bikes, scooters and mopeds? Is there any additional data you feel will be important to have that the City currently does not have access to? And then lastly, is NYPD regularly contacting hospitals to see whether there is data that they are missing on accidents and fatalities?

(01:27:07)

To the second point, I know... do you not? We do not. Do you know if there is a reason why you do not do that?

(01:27:14)

For the most part, when we have collisions or injuries that should be brought to the police's attention, we get called by the hospital. So someone reaches out for the most part. So I do not know that there are any misses I can identify here.

(01:27:29)

Madeline... Chief of Staff at DOT. I think the broader coalition work of all of our sister agencies on the Vision Zero Task Force includes Health and Hospitals as well as the Department of Health, and working with research institutions and Level One trauma centers to engage them both in an educational way as well as in a data way. So there are longer-term plans that have been mentioned in the Vision Zero Reimagined report the administration released earlier this month that talk further about our goals for better integration of all the pieces of data — from a collision to the streetscape to the hospital data — in a more holistic manner. So there are lots of goals for linking all this data more fully at each point and rationalizing it, as well as ensuring that we are not having misses that are in ERs or other places around the City.

(01:28:16)

So for Health and Hospitals, you are collecting that data. But if it is not a Health and Hospitals hospital, you are not. I just want to make sure I understand.

(01:28:24)

Yeah, I would have to go back and talk to our colleagues at the Department of Health who lead this coordination work with H+H, but I will follow up if you...

(01:28:31)

Could you please get back to the committees? I really would urge you to be working with all hospitals, because we are hearing from a lot of doctors about this issue, which is something concerning. So I think there really needs to be a real plan here to be working with our hospital system on this so that we are actually getting fulsome data on this.

Moving along to retailer accountability and illegal high-speed devices: the Council did an investigation regarding retailers and found that New Yorkers can still readily find and purchase illegal micro mobility devices both through brick-and-mortar retailers and online. What is the administration doing around noncompliance with our laws by those retailers?

(01:29:14)

Well, thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy to start and then I imagine Commissioner Flynn will want to jump in given their efforts on online enforcement. With respect to on-street enforcement, I am pleased to report that just this last week we completed 276 inspections. The results are encouraging. The number of unique businesses inspected in 2026 is already up about 50% from where we were in 2025. The number of locations with violations are down. The number of locations in compliance are up. None of this is to say we have solved the problem or that we do not have more work to do — we absolutely do. But our strategy of proactive compliance sweeps, combined with the possibility that these businesses can actually face sealing orders — eight of which we have issued, some of which we then rescinded after the businesses came into compliance — I think demonstrates that we are making progress and effectively enforcing Local Laws 39 and 49.

(01:30:10)

Speaker, I would also add that of the 53 businesses we found not to be in compliance during the most recent sweep...

(01:30:16)

13 have already moved back into compliance and the other 40 are scheduled for re-inspection as soon as possible.

(01:30:21)

And how does 276 inspections compare to the last couple of years? Let me see — I believe in 2025 we were at 190 and in 2024 we were at 317. That was a little bit of a wild west in 2024. Again, we are going to hit more before the end of the year, but I am encouraged by the trends we are seeing. Obviously we still have a lot of work to do.

(01:30:51)

Okay. I have a lot more questions, but I want to be respectful — we have got a lot of colleagues. So I am going to save the rest of mine for a second round and turn it back over to the chair. The chair wants to make a note on terminology before we begin with questions. I want to say a bit about terminology. This is a complex regulatory space with a mess of terms, and I am hoping this will help ensure we are on the same page before we dive in further.

I will be using the catch-all term "motorized micro mobility device" to refer to any motorized bike, scooter, hoverboard or other device that is not a moped or motorcycle. I will be referring to e-bikes that are currently legal to sell and operate in New York City as "street legal" — that includes properly certified Class One, Class Two and Class Three bikes. I will be referring to e-scooters that are currently legal to sell and operate in New York City as "street legal e-scooters." These are stand-up or sit-down scooters that meet state and city speed, weight and certification requirements. I will be using the term "motorized scooter" to refer to any motorized micro mobility device that is not legal for whatever reason — this includes mopeds, illegal bikes or any illegal micro mobility device.

I would like to make a request of all of us here today to please be as clear and precise as possible when describing these device categories, especially when sharing statistics or other data. I know it is challenging and at times the terminology can be confusing, but let us try our best. So starting off today, I would like to first get a general overview of the state of micro mobility in New York City. What percentage of total micro mobility ridership is made up of motorized micro mobility devices, including e-bike, e-scooter and moped ridership? And how has that ridership of motorized micro mobility devices changed over the last five years? That is a question for Commissioner Flynn, I believe.

(01:32:49)

Okay, thank you. So just to clarify — just an overall synopsis of micro mobility in the City? Great. Well, we will look up more specific numbers, but I can say at a general level what we have seen is certainly growth across the board. On the point of terminology, I will say "cycling" but I mean really any kind of cycling and micro mobility — that has grown by 60% in the last few years and continues to be the fastest growing mode as a percentage. In the actual safety data, what we have seen was there was a spike a few years back, and on the whole we have seen the numbers coming in the right direction in general this year.

Pedestrian fatalities currently at this point this year are at, I think, an all-time low or maybe tied for an all-time low. The same is true for motor vehicle occupants and traditional cyclists. Where we have seen the spike, as I mentioned earlier, was with e-bikes and scooters, and I think that is a reflection that some amount — we do not know the exact amount — of traditional cyclists have adopted e-bikes for all the reasons you and others have mentioned: they are convenient and a fast way to get around the City. So at the moment there is no percentage breakdown of micro mobility ridership in terms of ownership. In terms of ridership or ownership, there is not one, considering there is so much private use and private ownership. However, we can defer to others to speak to any of the information they have specifically on delivery workers and that population.

(01:34:40)

I mean, look, it is important to have that breakdown. I guess, you know, speak to the challenges of obtaining that breakdown and maybe a path to getting that breakdown. I think it is important for us to understand what is actually on our streets. If we cannot get that basic understanding, I think that poses a larger issue for us. Do you have any estimate of how many Class E bikes there are, and how did you arrive at that estimate?

(01:35:06)

We do not really have great numbers for that, for the reasons that Maddie mentioned. Many of them are privately owned, so we have mostly anecdotal data, I would say, based on either data with delivery workers or the crash reports we would get from NYPD. But we do not have that type of comprehensive number.

(01:35:30)

And is it the same with respect to an estimate on illegal motorized scooters — any breakdown on that on our City streets, and how did you arrive at that?

(01:35:41)

Estimate. So I think this actually speaks to one of the important reasons for this Council hearing today, which is we have a lot of information on car ownership because of all of the registration required at the state level. Without that information for these modes, we do not end up having... Please, if you would like to express yourself, please use hand gestures, and again if you are in violation of that, you will be escorted by the sergeant at arms. My apologies for the interruption. But to speak to the tracking of how we reach vehicle numbers, be they commercial, privately owned or otherwise — often that comes from the state, which has a much more accurate data pathway because of the license requirement. In this class, without any license requirement, there is not a single source of truth where they are captured in terms of the amount that are on the streets or that are sold. Of collisions involving motorized micro mobility devices, what percentage involved illegal devices? I do not know if anyone has this information.

(01:36:46)

So, very generally, I think the difficulty — and I think this is one of the reasons why we are here today — is that we do not break down the data on collisions by legal or not legal. It is just "bike" or "scooter" or that type of thing. But we do not do legal versus illegal on the street.

(01:37:05)

Does the administration have a plan to begin collecting that data? I think having that information is very important. Totally understood.

(01:37:17)

Though I will say, I think this will be coming up in the course of the hearing. Part of the challenge is that sometimes, particularly with the bikes, being able to tell on its face whether it is a street-legal or illegal device can be very difficult to determine. Now, when you have a fatality and you have an in-depth investigation, we are going to be able to determine that. But to the extent you are talking about an accident with no fatality and no serious injury — and that is a serious matter, I am not making light of any accident — a different type of investigation is going to go into that. To the extent that in every case whether a bike is street-legal or not on its face is a complicated matter. I am not saying it is impossible, but that is very challenging.

(01:38:10)

I understand it is complicated and I have a lot of questions on that later. The mayor was recently quoted in a press release stating that since 2017 more than 45 people have been killed while riding illegal bikes and more than 14 people have died while riding illegal stand-up scooters. Is it correct that the determination of whether a given e-bike or scooter was illegal was based on its maximum speed capability? Can you explain in more detail how that analysis was done? Thank you.

(01:38:43)

Yeah, that is right. So we have that breakdown for fatal crashes, and I guess...

(01:38:48)

Just to go to your earlier question — for this year, what we have seen so far is that roughly two of 17 of the fatalities have involved illegal e-bikes, and some were unknown, so it is possible. And then for stand-up scooters, six out of 11 were illegal and some were unknown. So that gives an idea. Was this the first time that the administration had assessed whether the devices involved in these fatalities were illegal or not?

(01:39:26)

We can speak to that. Thank you, Chair. No, I think that any time there is a fatal crash, the methods by which NYPD and DOT conduct an investigation and then analysis for future street safety work show that we are collecting a lot of information — getting photo, video and other information. DOT helps partner with NYPD's Chief of Transportation team to review the imagery from these more intense investigations and documentation to help assess the legality or illegality of a given device. That can include reference to the chart that we provided in our testimony, and some of the pieces there — which category it falls into based on its manufacturer and other information that the team supports with research.

(01:40:09)

If this is not the first time that the administration had assessed whether the devices involved in these fatalities were illegal or not, why has the administration not made those prior assessments available to the public? Yeah. So we work really hard and closely to put a lot of crash data on open data. I would have to go look closer to see if this level of detail is on there, but it is something we are happy to take a closer...

(01:40:52)

Look at. Does the administration track the infrastructural features of locations where serious and fatal micro mobility-involved crashes occur? For example, do you know what percentage of crashes occur on streets without protected bike infrastructure, without adequate street lighting, without traffic calming measures, et cetera?

(01:41:17)

Thank you. So we do a really robust post-crash process. We have a team that goes out following a crash to inspect the scene of a serious or fatal crash. They look to identify any immediate fixes that are needed, and then our safety planning team will develop any medium-term improvements that can address either that fatality or crash or just other issues. We certainly do a series of different kinds of studies looking at different aspects of safety, whether it is correlating it to the type of bike infrastructure or other kinds of infrastructure. I do not think I have the specific numbers here.

(01:41:58)

So it is the case that DOT does track the infrastructural features of locations where serious and fatal micro mobility-involved crashes occur? Correct? Yes. Okay. And if you can please follow up with my office with those specific breakdowns, that...

(01:42:11)

Will be very happy to. The micro mobility conversation often focuses on the potential...

(01:42:16)

Risk posed by riders of motorized micro mobility devices, but the data shows that cars and trucks remain the overwhelming cause of injury and death for our road users. So far in 2026, cars have killed 66 pedestrians while e-bikes have killed none. Cars and trucks result in 95% of deaths and serious injuries on our streets. Just this past Monday, a woman was struck and killed by a truck driver who then left the scene. This tragedy marks the tenth hit-and-run by a vehicle driver in two months and, according to some reports, the seventeenth bike rider killed on New York City streets so far this year. I want to extend my condolences to all these victims and their family members.

This is a real life-or-death priority for me and all New Yorkers who walk and bike in our City, and that is why on October 27 I plan to convene a hearing on the City's Vision Zero initiatives. I hope that we can have a full conversation at that time, but for now I want to ask: how does the administration's approach to micro mobility policy prioritize ending road violence caused by cars and...

(01:43:18)

Trucks. Thank you, Chair.

Yeah, I would absolutely agree that, you know, traffic safety is a very nuanced topic, and that is why we really try to use the data to help us prioritize our resources, our investments and our policies.

(01:43:37)

And I would echo what you said about what the data is showing us. We want to focus on where the greatest risks are. We released our Vision Zero re-plan a couple of weeks ago, and I think you will see in there really a reflection of that. I think as you opened today's hearing with, you know, it is a... we need to keep that greater perspective. Micro-mobility is one piece of the overall puzzle of safety on our streets. So I know we are talking in a lot greater detail at that hearing, but certainly our whole toolbox around Vision Zero...

(01:44:13)

Whether it is dramatically increasing our output of street safety redesigns, whether it is looking at automated enforcement's role in it, which we have found to be extremely effective, whether it is working with the Council or pursuing state-level legislation to increase accountability for the most dangerous and high-risk folks on our streets — that is all part of our approach. And before I pivot to effective and equitable on-street enforcement: what more can we do to reduce conflicts between micro-mobility users and large vehicles, particularly in areas like Midtown? Thank you.

(01:44:51)

Right. I think maybe what you are alluding to is that two of the recent fatalities were both on streets with bus lanes — 14th Street and 34th Street has the bus lane. We always look in reaction every time there is a serious or fatal crash, but likewise we are always looking systemically as well. Are there trends coming up? Maddie mentioned the Vision Zero task force. All the members of that group examine the data and we see what is bubbling to the surface. So if there is something like a particular issue like that — if it is a bus lane, or if it is interactions between trash or other large trucks and cyclists — then that is something we will home in on and we will really do a deep dive on it. So we will do a deep dive on that.

(01:45:42)

October 27. How many illegal motorized micro-mobility devices has NYPD impounded so far this year?

(01:45:48)

So when we see these motorized micro-mobility devices — whether mopeds, e-bikes and scooters — the decision to seize is based on whether the device itself was used in the commission of a crime: reckless driving of an e-bike, or an e-bike operator under the influence of alcohol and drugs, or if it is an illegal device — a motorized scooter that is an illegal scooter, or an unregistered moped, which means it cannot be registered. So year to date 2026: moped seizures, 100. In 2025: 141. E-bike seizures: 100...

(01:46:29)

2026 year to date: 126. How does the number of seized illegal micro-mobility devices compare to the number seized last year? I just gave the moped seizures. I am sorry, I do not have the e-bike seizures for 2025, but I do have the year-to-date numbers for 2026. Can you share those?

(01:46:51)

I am not... just share them.

(01:46:55)

Sorry. So you have the year-to-date numbers — can you share those?

(01:46:57)

Yeah. So for moped seizures: 100 — that is year to date 2026. E-bike seizures: 126, year to date 2026. What percentage were used for commercial...

(01:47:14)

purposes? So we do not track that.

(01:47:17)

Any reason why you do not track that? What we do track is, when it comes to seizures, the seizure reasons are based around the nature of the incident — not around whether the device itself was used for commercial...

(01:47:32)

purposes. And also the...

(01:47:33)

reality is that sometimes we are just not going to know.

(01:47:38)

Sometimes we will. Obviously, you can imagine lots of...

(01:47:39)

situations where officers are encountering an unlawful motorized scooter and the user may not even be there. And it is subject to — they are going to seize it for a variety of reasons, but they...

(01:47:53)

may not know, when they are creating that voucher for example, whether it was commercial or not. So again, it would be very hard to track that in a systematic, thorough way.

(01:48:03)

Can you describe NYPD's seizure process from beginning to end? For example, how is the determination to confiscate a device made — I think you were getting into that with Chief Obey earlier in your testimony — where is the device taken, and when and how is the device destroyed, and does the rider have any opportunity to appeal or retrieve their device? Walk me through the beginning: the decision-making to confiscate, where the device is taken, and when and how the device is destroyed.

(01:48:30)

Sure. Building off of what Chief Obey was saying a moment ago: the initial seizure happens for a variety of different reasons, and that will affect the path it takes. So it could be because it is being used in connection with a felony or misdemeanor. We do see that sometimes. It could be seized pursuant to the Administrative Code — that is 19-196.2(d) — as a motorized scooter when it is being used in a dangerous manner. It could also be an unregistered motor vehicle under the VTL. So when that happens, the device is going to be taken initially to the precinct of occurrence. There it is going to be vouchered — documenting, you know, where the device was taken from. And assuming we know who it was taken from, it will be stored initially at the command. At some point it will be transported to a property clerk facility, which typically would be the pound. Now in terms of the process after that...

(01:49:47)

The question would be whether we get a request to return it or we do not get a request for return — that will take different paths. So let us assume no request has ever been made to get the device back. It will be held: if it was taken as arrest evidence in connection with a felony or misdemeanor, we will wait until determination of the underlying criminal matter plus 151 days. Otherwise, if it was seized pursuant to that Admin Code provision I mentioned or pursuant to the VTL, 90 days. If after that time period no one has claimed it, it is going to be destroyed.

If someone comes to request the return of a device: if it was seized as arrest evidence, obviously it will wait until the underlying matter is resolved. The person has to provide proof of adjudication — let us say it was a criminal summons. If it is under the Admin Code or the VTL, again, assuming there was an OATH summons or a summons, that summons has to be adjudicated. The person comes to the command with evidence of that. And the last point I want to make is that depending on the situation — if you have something that is an unauthorized motor vehicle — they cannot just ride it away, because you cannot ride it on the streets of New York. So in that situation, the person either has to show up with the relevant license and registration, or they come with a flatbed truck and can put it on the truck. But we cannot...

(01:51:31)

let someone ride away on a device that is unlawful to ride on the streets of New York City.

(01:51:35)

Thank you. What percentage of NYPD's on-street micro-mobility-related enforcement actions target non-UL-certified devices, compared to devices that exceed legal speed and wattage limits?

(01:51:47)

So that enforcement is really not us. That is in the Admin Code 20-610. And that is really about points of sale — that is going to be the Fire Department...

(01:52:11)

So NYPD does not do enforcement actions that target non-UL-certified devices — is that correct?

(01:52:16)

I want to be clear, though, because the relevant Admin Code provision I believe you are talking about is not about possession. It is about selling it, renting it — the things you do at the point of sale. And actually by statute, NYPD does not have authority to do that. It actually falls to other agencies. So what type of...

(01:52:34)

enforcement actions have you done with respect to the legal speed and wattage limits? So you are talking about, like...

(01:52:45)

for example, with the e-bikes? Yes, yes. All right. So there really are two different...

(01:52:51)

things. If you are talking about the inspections at points of sale, I will actually turn it over to Chief Obey to discuss.

(01:53:06)

So with point-of-sale inspections — I just want to start by saying that we started this initiative in 2021, combining retailer education, working closely with inspections and then enforcement. So in 2021, which was phase one for us, the focus at that time was on motorized two-wheelers, specifically mopeds — mopeds that are problematic in the sense that they cannot be registered. In all of 2021 and 2022: 27 inspections, 108 seizures. We issued 108 OATH summonses. In all of 2023 and 2024: inspections 61, seizures 627, criminal and 22 OATH summonses. We did work through the first quarter of 2024 — January through March 2024: 263 inspections, 11 seizures, 19 criminal summonses issued and 11 OATH summonses.

In response to the concerns that we started to see — the trends in collisions and fatalities with e-bikes, especially e-bikes that are higher-powered, or Class 3 e-bikes and scooters — earlier this year, NYPD identified 71 storefront locations selling higher-powered devices.

(01:54:39)

We selected these devices... Commissioner, I think you have been responsive to my question. Oh, okay. I will now transition to my next set...

(01:54:46)

of questions. First, I want to quote again from the Vision Zero Reimagine report. One of the stated goals is to — and I quote — perform "removal of illegal and unlicensed micro-mobility devices from the streets" and "conduct targeted street sweeps and confiscation operations in areas with high concentrations of uncertified devices." Do any of the agencies at this table oppose this part of the Mayor's proposal?

(01:55:16)

That is in the Vision Zero Reimagine report — I just want to get that on the record.

(01:55:20)

No. I think we are all right. So will it be implemented...

(01:55:26)

equitably? We look to implement things in the way that we approach all of our work — whether it is design, enforcement or outreach. So yes. What does...

(01:55:36)

equitable enforcement look like in terms of the confiscations and the sweeps? I might differ. Yeah, sure.

(01:55:47)

So I just want to make sure that you support the coordinator's proposals, okay.

(01:55:53)

And the key is to do this right — to your point — in a fair way, in a data-driven way. We cannot be everywhere all the time. There has to be... this is a decision about resources and deployment, and the key is to do that in a way that is data-driven, not anecdotal.

(01:56:12)

But where are we seeing concentrations? When it comes to enforcement, it is the injuries, crashes and deaths that should drive the decision. So you are referring to objective measures. Got it. Talk about...

(01:56:24)

All right. So what tool to objectively measure whether a device is legal would make the Mayor's confiscation proposal more equitable than reliance on visual inspection only?

(01:56:33)

You are talking about the dynamometer. I am getting towards...

(01:56:36)

that. Okay, sure. No. So...

(01:56:39)

when it comes to the dynamometer bill, you are certainly right on the issue. We think the idea of using this device is very interesting. It really speaks to the challenge that we have around street-legal versus street-illegal devices, so I think that is very important. Now it is new to us, and we do have a lot of questions about...

(01:57:08)

how we would use it. It is new — I think it would be new to any major American city — and so that raises a host of questions in terms of procurement and cost and operational functionality. How would this work in practice? How would we actually do it? And those are a lot of questions. Just so you know, I am sure you know the Bill that I am referring to only refers to the use of the technology. It does not speak to how it gets implemented, and so it gives the agency a lot of discretion on how that gets implemented.

(01:57:47)

A hundred percent. I do think it is important that before we are legislatively mandated to do this, we first work with you and your team in the Council to explore these questions. And the answers to those questions... will you join us for a demonstration of the use of the device? Certainly, we would certainly be happy to do that. I will invite you to that.

(01:58:07)

How do officers verify the maximum speed and wattage of a device currently that they suspect of being illegal?

(01:58:12)

Right. We do not have technology that allows us to do that in the field. There are times... we have...

(01:58:18)

there are members of service, certain people on... I got your answer on that. Moving to the...

(01:58:23)

next one. How are enforcement officers instructed to treat devices that are designed to switch between a slower, street-legal mode and a higher-speed, unrestricted mode? How are officers able to identify such devices that can change modes in the field? A lot of these devices can switch and can be controlled physically. How can you tell?

(01:58:46)

Right. And I was trying to say before: there are members of service who have the expertise and experience — they will sometimes be able to recognise devices. There are times when you can look online and determine basically how a device is advertised and what the capability is. But to your point, it is true that...

(01:59:05)

absent the experience, and things being advertised as how they actually work in practice — without that, can someone just tell by looking at the e-bike what the maximum speed is? No. The answer is no. All right.

(01:59:25)

And the reason I asked that question is that despite the switching of the mode, a dynamometer can still test for the wattage and power of these devices. So even if they can switch modes, it can detect the wattage power, so that folks do not try to circumvent a dynamometer. And just to be clear...

(01:59:46)

the dynamometer as a technology is able to figure out or determine that wattage. There is no question that that could be very useful. We do have, again, on the front end, the contracting process — incredibly important, has to be done with great care, obviously. But also operationally, how would this work? How would this actually work on the street? That is separate from... we can learn and we can figure that out.

(02:00:12)

How do NYPD officers distinguish between Class one, Class two and Class three when issuing a violation or completing an incident report? Which specific materials or information do officers rely on?

(02:00:23)

So in most situations — almost all situations — whether it is a Class one, Class two or Class three is not actually relevant for enforcement purposes. There are some very narrow exceptions to that. But in the vast majority of situations, the question is: is it an illegal bike or an unlawful motorized scooter?

(02:00:42)

Right. Whether it is Class one, Class two or Class three — in most situations that is not going to matter for us. Is an assessment made on the ground by the officer issuing a violation ever verified or double-checked by NYPD?

(02:00:58)

I am not sure exactly what you mean by that. Again, it is sort of... an officer issues a violation...

(02:01:03)

Does a supervisor or someone else verify that, or do you just take it for what it is and move on?

(02:01:09)

Well, again, in many situations — if you are talking about a random patrol officer on the street — they are rarely going to be making determinations in the field in terms of Class one, Class two, Class three, or about maximum speed. When we are doing inspections or we are doing an in-depth investigation, that is very different. There you have individuals who have tremendous expertise and experience with this, and it is a much more in-depth process. But again, I want to emphasise that these determinations — Class one, Class two, Class three — in the vast majority of situations do not bear on our enforcement.

(02:01:50)

Have officers ever made an incorrect assessment about whether a device is legal or illegal that has resulted in a violation being erroneously issued or thrown out? For instance, has a Class three device that is currently legal to operate ever been erroneously confiscated by NYPD?

(02:02:06)

Has that ever happened? I am sure that has happened. Okay.

(02:02:08)

And then if you had a dynamometer, would that delivery worker have been able to keep their device?

(02:02:15)

To be blunt: if you are assuming that every patrol officer has a dynamometer... I mean, I just... just to be blunt. Again, is it fair to say that a worker would have a Class three device in their hands today if the officer who erroneously confiscated a device had had a dynamometer? If an officer made a mistake regarding the legality of the device, and if that officer had had a dynamometer, that could have potentially — yes — there are scenarios where it would have prevented that from happening.

(02:02:54)

My Int 0906-2026 would require NYPD to use portable dynamometer devices that are capable of verifying the maximum wattage and motor-assisted speed of micro-mobility devices. And finally, I am just going to ask this question: would you agree that having access to a real-time, objective verification of a device's maximum wattage and motor-assisted speed would assist officers in making on-the-ground determinations about whether devices are legal? And again, in the abstract, the answer to that is yes, of course. There are a host of practical, pragmatic considerations that just have to be thought through. That is...

(02:03:27)

all. All right. So I am going...

(02:03:29)

To show you this photo right here. I want to take a pause here and I will show my colleagues. All right, look at this. I want to take a pause here and just stress how difficult it can be to distinguish between legal and illegal micro-mobility devices. In each of these images, one of the devices is street legal in New York City and the other is not. Can you tell the difference? No? I cannot answer that. I mean, you cannot, of course. I am not going to ask you in this moment to try and verify which is which, because I recognize that it is an unfair question. But I think seeing these types of devices side by side, one legal and one not, drives home how nearly impossible it is to tell what kind of device is which by just looking at them.

(02:04:19)

If we want to be able to get the fast and dangerous illegal devices off our streets, and to do so without unfairly targeting or confiscating legal devices, we need a way to identify device types accurately. A dynamometer will give us this ability and take the guesswork out of enforcement. Thank you.

I know that the administration shares my goal of getting fast, dangerous devices off our streets. According to the recently released Vision Zero Reimagine report, one of the administration's micro-mobility priorities is the transition of New Yorkers and delivery workers away from devices capable of traveling more than 20 miles per hour. My first question is, and this is for the Department of Transportation: do you think that any citywide effort to transition away from the use of devices capable of going faster than 20 miles per hour would have to involve an eventual ban on the operation of Class 3 bikes in New York City? Thank you.

(02:05:24)

So I guess I would start by pointing out that there are wheeled devices capable of going over 20 miles per hour that already are legal in our city, like mopeds. They are regulated differently. So I think, like I mentioned earlier, we want to look at a more holistic approach to how we classify, and honestly, a simpler and clearer approach, because as you mentioned, even the chart in my testimony is complicated. So as we mentioned in Vision Zero Reimagine, we do want to pursue state legislation that would clarify it. But in the meantime, we feel that restricting the sale and rental of Class 3 bikes makes a lot of sense. An eventual banning of Class 3 bikes is not something that the administration is willing to do. I mean, I have heard from advocates that there are plenty of these going up to 25 miles per hour. The legislation being considered would have an eventual transition away over two years, which is normally the life of a ban. I understand you are pursuing state legislation, which if we went through state legislation, it would require a Class 3 device to be registered.

(02:06:42)

Is that correct? If they were to be changed in that way. So is it fair to say the administration supports registration of Class 3 bikes pursuant to state legislation? I think there are a lot of discussions. That is the direction. If you do Class 3, it would have to be registered.

(02:06:56)

There are a lot of discussions with stakeholders, legislators and advocates, and analysis, frankly, to understand what is the best approach. I am not suggesting a specific approach. I was just giving an example that Class 3 bikes are only one piece of the puzzle. But certainly we want an approach that puts safety front and center. That would be the number one priority and that would drive it. I think we are still, with the specific bill, we would need more time to analyze the specifics, connect with stakeholders and understand the impacts, because the impacts would be significant. And even if we were to...

(02:07:36)

Even if, let us just for the sake of argument say the administration did support a Class 3 registration pursuant to state legislation, these devices cannot be registered because they have no VIN numbers. Do you recognize that?

(02:07:50)

Yeah, this would be a more comprehensive change to the regulatory structures. So given that difficulty...

(02:07:59)

If we are saying that we need to transition away from devices that go over 20 miles per hour, is the administration willing to leave anywhere between 600,000 and 2,000,000 Class 3 bikes on our streets, even though they are dangerous? We absolutely support the intent to cycle those out. Well...

(02:08:15)

The intent is to ban them over a time period that actually works, that gives delivery workers the time to save for a new bike, but also making sure that we are getting these dangerous devices off our streets. And if 20 is plenty, is the mayor's position that 25 is plenty? So I think you are going to say 20 is plenty. 20 is plenty. We do support that. I think these are the kinds of discussions we would like to have with the Council and with other...

(02:08:44)

...stakeholders. Before I turn it over to my colleagues for questions, I know there have been conversations about being in the purview of enforcing street safety laws. I just want to ask the question: do you wish to outsource your street safety enforcement to DOT? No. Okay. And my question to you, Commissioner, is: would you like to enforce street safety laws? I think that is a massive question. Do you have the manpower to enforce current street safety laws? No. No further questions. Thank you.

I will now turn it over to CM Epstein. Thank you. Thank you all. I know it is going to be a long day for all of you, so I appreciate it, and for the public here, thank you for sticking with us. I know there are people still waiting outside. We are still trying to get them in, so if you are not staying, please give up your seats so someone who is trying to get in can get inside.

(02:09:48)

Can I first start with the high crash intersections? You mentioned there are 15 intersections. What data did you use to come up with those 15 intersections, and can you tell us where those intersections are?

(02:10:01)

Absolutely. We worked closely with... we can certainly give you what we used at the time. These 15 corridors were established going back to 2024. One such example is Ocean Parkway, which I just mentioned, in the 60th and 66th precincts, and we maintain...

(02:10:21)

...data across this corridor. So where are the 15? Can you tell us where those 15 intersection locations are?

(02:10:27)

It is the entire city essentially, but there are only 15. So we are not talking about... they cover multiple precincts. For instance, I gave you Ocean Parkway, right? That is the 60th and 61st precinct. So I am going to go by precincts: Eastern Parkway, the 73rd, 70th and 77th precincts. Sixth Avenue in Manhattan is the First Precinct, Sixth Precinct in Manhattan, South Manhattan, Midtown North, Midtown South. So it touches the entire city, it touches every borough. And so what data did...

(02:10:59)

...you use to determine that? Did you use 311 data or crash data? What would you do? At DOT, we go where the data...

(02:11:05)

...takes us. These are the locations across the city where, at the time and even now, the numbers are much better now, but we still maintain these same corridors. At the time there were spikes in fatalities, spikes in collisions and injuries. Going back to Ocean Parkway, last year in March 2025 there were three fatalities. We had that horrific incident. Last year, this year as we sit here...

(02:11:30)

...zero fatalities. Yeah. But I would like the data for all 15 intersections, because I appreciate that you are naming one, which is great, and we can name more. I have the data for all of them.

(02:11:39)

Great. I mean, we maintain it. It is not a...

(02:11:41)

Yeah, I am happy. I am sure the public would like to hear it.

(02:11:45)

Sure. We are happy to add to this as well. We receive NYPD's crash data and then we process it and do the analysis. We help look at what the trends are that help drive our Vision Zero work as well as DOT-specific work on street redesigns. The corridors are arterial roads, 15 of them, not just intersections but full corridors across the entire city. We can get you the full list, but these are where we have seen the most fatalities and collisions and they are our highest risk corridors throughout the city.

(02:12:16)

And just so I am clear, did you determine if there is a bus lane or bike lane there? Did you use 311 data on complaints to kind of assess these corridors? What data did you use?

(02:12:28)

We just looked at collisions, injuries and fatalities. Those are the three main factors. So if there are 500 complaints about First Avenue and 14th Street, just as an example from my district and the border with CM Abreu's district, where we have seen a lot of injuries but we have not seen... we did have a fatality a week ago, but how would that measure up if there are hundreds of complaints? Is that a factor that you are looking at?

(02:12:53)

I would say that we take in 311 complaints and anything that comes to our correspondence unit or our ARTS program, which is sort of our in-house 311 for tracking communication from the public. We also work closely with all of your offices, with our sister agencies, with the mayor's office. It also includes our New York City public school system. So we are taking in inputs as it relates to what is on the ground from a street design...

(02:13:22)

...perspective and reviewing those as well, so that would be housed within...

(02:13:26)

And then is that information shared out to the public, so they know these are the 15 intersections that have high crash data?

(02:13:34)

I am not sure if there has been a public release of this, but it is something where we have been out visibly. The high visibility corridors collaboration between NYPD and DOT has gone back several years, and it accounts for both an education and enforcement component. So both DOT staff and NYPD officers are out there together on the corridor in sequence to ensure that folks are aware of what their responsibilities are as drivers on the road, to be safe, to drive the speed limit, and to make sure that we follow up with enforcement after the education.

(02:14:05)

Yeah, I mean, it would be great for us to have it too, because obviously collaboration across the board is important. Are there bike lanes at those intersections? Are there bus lanes at those intersections? What is the... kind of why is that intersection determined to be a higher crash area? I think there is fuller information that might be helpful for all of us to help you ensure that people know these locations are identified, and we can help identify those locations to reduce incidents and reduce...

(02:14:37)

...fatalities. We are happy to take any information from yourself and absolutely include it in our...

(02:14:42)

I would love to see this data be made public, because I do think it is important for us to know and for the public to know that these are high crash areas. And if something is not listed on that report, people could say, hey, this is a tough intersection. We could look for some remedies. Maybe there is a way, if there is a bike lane or not, a bus lane or not, could you add traffic calming measures to help that intersection?

(02:15:09)

Thank you. I would say that is essentially the bread and butter of the work of the New York City Department of Transportation. We are thrilled to work with you on that, and I think we are happy to explore any sort of particular problematic corridors, intersections or locations.

(02:15:26)

Great. And then how would the public or us be able to get a concerning corridor on a list for further review?

(02:15:35)

Sure. I mean, we have multiple channels for folks to do that. They can reach out through 311 and they can reach out to our bureau commissioner's offices. Obviously we love to hear from our Council partners and things you are hearing from your constituents. Community boards, of course. So there are different ways for things to be elevated, and as Maddie said, this is at the core of what we do and we are always interested in refining.

(02:16:05)

You basically said you did not use 311 data to determine these intersections, so...

(02:16:11)

Hello. Yeah. So for that particular initiative between our agencies, it is really data driven around crashes, because that is the crux of the issue. But when we think about safety more broadly at DOT, we are thinking about all these different channels to get both quantitative and qualitative input. And just for these intersections, do we have data about whether helmets were used, if it was a bicycle crash? Do we have that kind of data?

(02:16:36)

Thank you. If there was a fatality, do we know if someone had a helmet on or not? Was it a car and a bike? Are we collecting that data? I am sorry, could you repeat the question?

(02:16:45)

Yeah. So if we have a fatality...

(02:16:48)

...at an intersection and we are determining it is a high crash area, are we also evaluating whether, if there was an injury of someone on a bike, whether a helmet was being used, whether safety measures were in place, whether it was in a bike lane, a bus lane, kind of what the infrastructure was at those intersections? Not the infrastructure for sure, but the type of device, whether or not the deceased had a helmet? Yes, all of...

(02:17:13)

...that is gathered by a data team. Have you determined in these areas the time of day or time of evening when these incidents are occurring? Have you determined that, like, the data we have collected shows it is in the evening? Is that something you have made a determination on? If you have, what improvements on lighting and support have you put into place at those intersections?

(02:17:40)

So I can speak to just one example, again going back to Ocean Parkway, because we did a lot of work there. That collision was driven by speed, so naturally we reached out to our partners. I do not know if they could speak to speed and automated speed enforcement along that corridor. That was one thing. This is going back to 2025. Yeah, absolutely.

(02:18:05)

Thank you. So I guess a couple of things that you asked about: the infrastructure. Absolutely, at DOT we look at both the immediate aftermath of a serious crash, but also obviously as part of our more systemic work across the whole city, prioritizing different corridors and areas. So yes. And then you mentioned time of day. Absolutely, we are always looking at trends in the data. One thing we have discovered is that as we get to the fall and it gets darker earlier in the day, we do see an uptick. We know, for example, that Halloween is actually one of the most challenging. So we are always looking at different kinds of trends and then tailoring our approach in...

(02:18:51)

...response. So for example, you mentioned Sixth Avenue and the Sixth Precinct. What kind of modifications have you made on Sixth Avenue to deal with the crash data there?

(02:19:05)

You identified the location as Sixth Avenue, right?

(02:19:08)

So I just want to be clear that these are lengthy corridors that run the entire city. Sure. I just gave an example of a location again.

(02:19:19)

Sixth Avenue in Manhattan, touching on four separate precincts. We have not had anything that I can speak to personally. Again, we look at what concerns us, which is fatalities, serious injuries and collisions. So if there is something along that corridor that really rises to that level, say we see a series of fatalities, God forbid, we throw everything at it. We are putting our heads together with our partners, again going back to speed enforcement and automated speed enforcement devices along that corridor. So there are recommendations that come after we see a spike, so to speak. When there is something like that, then we get together.

(02:20:06)

And yeah, I am asking specifically about the Sixth Avenue corridor. You mentioned the Sixth Avenue corridor as an example, but what have you done...

(02:20:17)

...enforcement on Sixth Avenue? Okay, so I will tell you, the Sixth Avenue corridor again: the First Precinct, Sixth Precinct, Midtown North. In 2026 year to date, 193. Last year, 179, so up by 14, but the year is not quite over yet. Down in total injuries: 87 from 104 last year. Again, year to date in 2025, but this year to date is 87. And I will tell you that it is one versus one in terms of fatalities along that corridor, again touching four...

(02:20:50)

...precincts. I think part of what you see here is that we work very, very closely together. We have the enforcement piece. It is only one piece, obviously an important piece. So we will do the in-depth work, looking in depth at these collisions...

(02:21:12)

We will drive enforcement, working very closely with DOT, who will then look at this in a more programmatic way. Obviously they have lots of pieces here that are not the enforcement piece, whether it is education, whether it is structural issues. So it is very much a collaborative effort between us. We have the enforcement piece and DOT has the broader piece.

(02:21:33)

Then on Sixth Avenue specifically, just to put a finer point on that, we have been in the process of developing and implementing a range of street redesign changes. One thing that we were seeing there is that as the volume of cyclists and micromobility users has increased, the bike lane starts to get congested. You have a speed differential between the higher and lower speed micromobility users, so part of our redesign is actually to widen the bike lane to make sure there is enough space for cyclists to safely pass each other.

(02:22:03)

And you mentioned that the crashes are mostly auto-related. So are there street calming techniques you are using, like on the Sixth Avenue corridor, to slow that down and avoid additional fatalities on Sixth Avenue?

(02:22:19)

Absolutely, and it is always a very holistic approach. We are always looking at all the different aspects of the street and how it works for all the users. It is very rarely just like, here is the hammer, here is the nail. There are usually a bunch of different pieces. So on Sixth Avenue, it is things like the overall geometry, the number of travel lanes, the width of the lanes. Is there room for curb extensions to slow turning vehicles and improve visibility? It could be hardening, it could be things like the traffic signal timing, like I mentioned the bike lane, and probably other things I am forgetting. But it is really a soup-to-nuts approach. It would be great to see

(02:23:00)

what those are at these top 15 intersections — what those activities are — so that we are educated and can educate the public on what you are doing. Because if I do not know what you are doing on parts of my district or other people's districts, it is hard to know that the general public would have that information as well, to say, hey, this is what is happening. Is this improving the situation? And whether there are tools that could be available to us all to be able to improve those concerns. Thank you, Chair.

(02:23:27)

I am happy to discuss that with my team. Yeah, if you can get us that in writing about what you are doing in these top 15 areas, I think that would be useful for us to have. Okay, thank you. So I want to go back to something we heard a lot about from people over the years around people riding on the sidewalk and what to do about that activity. I think it has been mentioned here that enforcement is just one piece. In the traffic safety world, we talk about the three E's: enforcement, education and engineering. As it pertains to sidewalk riding, someone mentioned enforcement numbers. In 2026 year to date: 711. In 2025 it was 446 for bikes. For e-scooters: 164 year to date versus 32 in 2025. So you are saying you are giving people tickets for riding on the sidewalk — is that what you are saying? That is the enforcement piece of it.

(02:24:39)

What about the education side? Is there a public education campaign you are running? Can you talk about that?

(02:24:49)

One thing I want to note too, to Chief Obey's point about the three E's, there is also an engineering component. We have actually done a real good amount of data analysis and found that when we provide bike lanes, it significantly reduces sidewalk riding. That just underscores that we are taking this comprehensive approach. We could talk in a little more depth about our education campaigns more broadly.

(02:25:17)

We take public education really seriously. We think that an all-of-the-above approach is really a critical piece of the success of Vision Zero. Every potential input matters. One piece obviously is the importance of educating our New York City school students. We are working closely with the New York City Public Schools team, both in terms of a curriculum approach as well as more broadly engaging with the schools around the logistics around their actual facilities. From a holistic perspective, ensuring that children have safe routes to school and know the risks of different types of devices in terms of their speed, their legality and all of that.

We have also done public education campaigns in the recent past, especially as we started to see the increase in the use of micromobility devices on our streets in recent years, to remind people to get smart before you start. We distributed those materials widely to brick-and-mortar bike shops and facilities, to our sister agencies and to the broader public. We also worked with stakeholders, including delivery workers and their representative organizations, to really ensure we are going as far and wide as possible. We maintain a multimodal field engagement presence that is out in the field regularly. They are some of the same people that are engaging delivery workers alongside DOT, as well as engaging everyday New Yorkers on the high-visibility corridors with Chief Obey's staff.

(02:26:50)

Yeah, thank you. It would be great to talk more about high-visibility corridors and maybe if we can map those out in the City. I feel like where I represent and live, there are a lot of bike issues going on and a lot of safety concerns. So it would be great to know about the high-visibility corridors and then maybe figure out ways to do further collaboration, because obviously we want people to be safe here. Just around that — the balance around worker protections and safety — what policy are you working on now to ensure we have those protections for public safety and worker protections at the same time?

(02:27:35)

Sure. Fundamentally, our administration and certainly our department feels that these goals — worker safety and worker well-being — are not in conflict. In fact, they are complementary. One of the points I made at the beginning is that the deactivation protections, for example, are an absolutely critical ingredient to a comprehensive safety strategy. At the end of the day, if workers feel that they can be deactivated arbitrarily, without cause, for say not hitting those delivery times, we are never going to have safety on the streets because we are forcing people to choose between their livelihoods and their safety. We are also strong supporters, as you know, of the Council's minimum pay rate, which we have been implementing and enforcing aggressively. That is part of having a more professional delivery workforce. The apps wanted to have a model where they bring in tens of thousands of people to occasionally do deliveries, maybe not trained on what is safe, maybe not trained on the legal devices. Our focus is on making sure you can actually earn a living as a delivery worker, you can afford a safe device, know how to operate a device and know that you are not going to be fired for putting safety

(02:28:41)

first. Just on the current deactivation protections and due process protections — are there currently enough protections already within the law for workers to prevent deactivation without due process? I think when Local Law 34 takes effect there will be. And do you think there are additional protections that need to be put in place to protect those

(02:29:00)

workers? That is a very good question, Council Member. I think we should have follow-up discussions around it. I want to

(02:29:05)

make sure the companies are complying with Local Law 34. I have made clear to them I expect compliance on day one. But we should have additional discussions about whether that regime protects drivers from unjust deactivation. Just to be clear.

(02:29:18)

I would like to reiterate the Commissioner's point as well about how all these systems and policies from our respective agencies are really working together. Obviously, the work that DOT is going to be doing on street enforcement is critical. What we do to ensure that vehicles are affordable for New Yorkers and that they are able to keep their jobs and not be fired arbitrarily — that is critical. What DOT does on the traffic safety side, the enforcement question of holding — we are hoping to hold these companies accountable. This all works in tandem, and I think that coordination is what we are trying to bring to this legislative package today as well.

(02:29:53)

I want to turn back then. Okay. CM Brewer's bill earlier around the notices to workers — companies have a role in ensuring that workers have appropriate gear on. What oversight do you provide to make sure that is actually happening on the street?

(02:30:13)

We do not have a direct role, Council Member. That is not what we enforce. What I will say — and we are in regular touch with our other agency partners about this — is we do have concerns, candidly, that we do not want someone losing their job, possibly losing their place in this country, because they do not have a vest on. I do not mean to minimize the importance of wearing these vests — I think it is highly important — but as you said earlier, I do think it is important to strike a balance and recognize: yes, we need enforcement, yes, we need to monitor this, but no, we should not have workers losing their job for, say, a first-time

(02:30:50)

infraction. I think an important point that was raised earlier was that for years there was a pattern of noncompliance with certain laws under previous administrations. What CM Brewer's bill is going to be able to do is connect noncompliance with an implication on the license. We are working closely with our colleagues at DOT and with the apps and also with delivery workers as well to ensure that there is a smooth rollout of these requirements that does not have the unintended consequence of workers being deactivated. We are fully committed to enforcing that once it is in place.

(02:31:24)

I do want to turn our attention to — I was just going to add that on the commercial bicycling law enforcement, we have had over 5,000 workers take our bicycle safety course so far. As Carlos mentioned, we are in active communication with the industry about the laws, including the vest requirement. It is happening and we take it seriously.

(02:31:45)

Yeah, I appreciate that, and I appreciate that more training is always going to be helpful for workers and for the public at large. But I do want to turn our attention to the companies themselves, because I think what we are seeing is pressure on the workers from the companies. What role do you have in overseeing those companies to ensure that workers are not being pressured to do illegal routes, not going too quickly? What can be done to make sure those companies are having workers comply with the law and are protected?

(02:32:18)

I am happy to discuss that, Chair, and I will also talk about how we are working with DOT on this as well and how we are going to deepen that partnership as this legislation passes. We are very focused on vigorous enforcement of deactivation protections starting now. I cannot underscore enough that at the end of the day, all the training in the world, while critical, is not going to be sufficient if a worker goes out on the street and feels that they are going to lose their job if they do not hit these unrealistic delivery times. That is why we are going to enforce the just cause deactivation law aggressively. That is why we are fighting for the minimum pay rate and enforcing the minimum pay

(02:32:57)

rate. It is why our administration is committed to and supports the legislation that would have additional safety data reported to the administration. Our suggestion on that legislation is that the data go to the Department of Transportation because they have expertise on street safety. But I can assure you, Chair, that our agencies have been working hand in hand and will continue to work hand in hand to make sure this is a holistic and coordinated strategy to ensure safety on our streets and prevent arbitrary deactivations.

(02:33:29)

And if I may add — thanks, Commissioner. I want to underscore that we do appreciate the Council's attention to this because it is really true: the industry is dependent on access to our streets, our curb space and our sidewalks, but we have very limited insight into how they are operating and what the implications are. We do not have the data that we need to really evaluate their impact on these public assets. Access to that data would really bolster our ability to examine the transportation and street safety impacts of their delivery worker model and would inform future investment and policy.

(02:34:03)

Yeah, it is really interesting that this industry is not just relying on public space — it is exclusively relying on public space and then making money off access to that public space. They are underutilizing their responsibility to ensure that when they are using it, they are using it appropriately. I want to make sure that they are held accountable. I am wondering — I hear what you are saying about the deactivation protections, but I am not sure you have enough tools. Even once we get the deactivation protections, do you have enough tools to ensure the companies are doing the right thing? Do you feel like you have enough tools, once the deactivation law comes into effect next year, to force companies to do the right thing in our public spaces?

(02:34:46)

I think we do. I think you are absolutely right on your premise, Chair. These are companies that have built a business model purporting to not employ their workers, not paying for the infrastructure they use — which is our City streets — raking in tens of billions of dollars from New Yorkers, and leaving the responsibility for street safety to the government, to the police and to others. It is a broken business model, and much of this legislation is going to go a long way toward fixing

(02:35:13)

that, which will expand our capacity to effectively enforce the law. I do have confidence we are going to be able to do that. We are already working closely with worker organizations, including thanks to the support you are providing to nontraditional worker organizations, to ensure workers understand their rights. The ticket front is important, and I will add that I think our victory last week over DoorDash — I was pleased to stand alongside you to announce that — demonstrates that this is a department and an administration that is capable of taking on massive lawbreaking and delivering big wins for the City. We are not afraid to take these companies to court, and if they violate our laws, we are going to do just

(02:35:49)

that. Chair, I would just like to share that, just to echo Commissioner Levin's testimony, there are certainly bills in this package that we can see are adding additional tools to our enforcement mechanisms here.

(02:36:03)

All right. And then so we certainly want to work with those. Additionally, there are a lot of people here who want to testify. We just want to make sure that everyone has had a chance to comment — delivery workers, street safety advocates — because ultimately we are in the first step of this legislative process where we have to hear these voices out if we want to develop good, coordinated

(02:36:19)

policy.

(02:36:19)

And my final question — just for DOT — potentially we can give you a lot more ability to do data collection. Do you have the resources in-house to be able to analyze and synthesize that data so it will be useful to the public? I would say

(02:36:38)

yes. Safety analysis is really core to what we do and we have created this Sustainable Delivery Unit. We also have a Safety Analytics Unit, and we have resources across the department. I think for this particular analysis we do have what we need. I would just say that Int 0950-2026 would basically give us that ability. We need to get the data, but then we can study it and promulgate rules based on what we are seeing there. Thank you.

(02:37:06)

Thank you, Chair. Thank you. Before we turn over the chair, I would like to recognize CM Krishnan, CM Brooks-Powers, CM Sanchez, CM Morano, CM Ariola and CM Avilés. We have also been joined by the Borough President, who is in the back. Thank you for joining us. Chair Louis, thank you.

(02:37:21)

Thank you so much, Chairs Abreu and Epstein. I have two sets of questions: one related to enforcement at the street level and second on enforcement at the point of sale. But before that, I just want to ask some follow-up questions to the questions that our Speaker asked about the laws that we passed in 2017 related to the vests and also the licenses that these drivers have to carry. So who is in charge of enforcing those laws? DOT is able to enforce them, and it is also in the NYPD code, so I believe they are also able to. I would defer to our colleagues at NYPD to speak more on that.

(02:38:00)

Right. So there is a street-level piece and then there is the corporate regulatory piece.

(02:38:08)

The corporate regulatory piece is really much more for DOT. It is not something that a patrol officer is going to do in terms of looking at the employer side. With regard to the street-level enforcement, as I said earlier in response to the Speaker's question, we are going to take that back and look very carefully at it in terms of the training that we are giving to the officers.

(02:38:28)

We are to look at the training given to officers. What, if anything, has the administration done so far to get us to compliance with that law? I know that this has been an issue over the course of several administrations. The introduction of the law early on, over a decade ago, started, I think, from a place where we were in a very different economy and use of our streets than we are today, in terms of the devices and the companies that are out there. For the most part at that time, enforcement was at brick and mortar locations with dedicated employee delivery workers and couriers. Obviously the landscape of the City has changed quite a bit since the original introduction of the Bill. Across the last two administrations, the Department of Transportation has sent letters about a lack of compliance to the third party delivery companies that are licensed by DOT and have been rebuffed on those in the past in terms of formal compliance. That is why it is so important to tighten up these laws, and the proposed legislation as well as other legislation that has passed recently affects how long... How long does the administration think it will take to get us to full compliance with that law, or at least fair compliance?

(02:39:48)

I think we will need to have discussions with our partners and take a closer look at it.

(02:39:52)

What steps do you think we have to take to get us to a good amount of compliance with that law? Do you think we will be able to make progress in six months? In our conversations regularly with the companies, we have given them a deadline of March 2027 to be in full compliance.

Okay. So a few questions on street level enforcement. As we know, micro mobility devices provide a lot of benefits to our communities, and that can make enforcement on this issue challenging and complicated. We obviously want to make sure there are a lot of interests to balance. We want to encourage their use, which is good for our environment and good for congestion. They are great for the riders who are able to get from point A to point B very quickly. We obviously, in the long term, do not want to go so far as to discourage the use of these devices.

At the same time, we want to make sure that they are used responsibly and safely. When these devices are not used responsibly, they create foreseeable safety risks for all of us, including the riders. When people drive these devices recklessly, running red lights, speeding, driving on sidewalks, driving the wrong way on a road — obviously people in our City should not have to worry about their safety when navigating our streets. So a few questions for the NYPD. How does the NYPD prioritize enforcement of violations related to e-bikes, bicycles, scooters and mopeds? Is the location, type of violation and history in the area a factor?

(02:41:39)

Right. So I will turn it over to Chief Obey in just one second. I think, at a high level, big picture — it is data. We are getting crash data, injury data and fatality information from DOT. Obviously we are also getting complaints from the public. Several Council Members have raised this: 311 calls, issues raised in the community. All of that has to go into it. It has to be data driven. It cannot be anecdotal. We are looking at the totality of the data we have, both in terms of DOT data, our own data and data regarding community complaints, and looking at that in totality and being responsive to that. So with that, I will turn it over to the Chief.

(02:42:26)

So in addition to what our Commissioner mentioned, I did touch on point of sale initiatives. The goal there, again, is to remove unsafe motorized devices from retailers. I gave some testimony on that earlier. So with enforcement, we have the numbers — I can certainly provide the numbers — but I do want to emphasize that we focus on the worst violators and violations, essentially the most egregious...

(02:42:57)

...violations: reckless driving...

(02:42:59)

...disobeying red lights and traffic control devices, wrong way driving, disobeying stop signs, failure to yield. Those are the types of summonses that we focus on. I just wanted to mention that. We do have the data on scooters and that type of thing, and we also have seizures on the enforcement end.

(02:43:18)

A few questions on mopeds. How many illegal or unregistered mopeds has the NYPD received so far this year? And how do the numbers compare to past years? I know you briefly touched on it earlier, but I want to be careful with that because we do not make that distinction. I can give you the numbers, but we do not distinguish legal versus non-street-legal devices. We just record what we seize — whether it is an e-bike, a moped, a standup scooter or a motorcycle. So there is no distinction that is made.

(02:43:49)

Okay, so how many this year compared to the previous two...

(02:43:52)

...years? So for all motorized devices: for motorcycles this year to date, 2,465; in 2025, 5,543. For mopeds: this year, 1,080; in 2025, 1,424; in 2024, 1,206 versus 957. For standup scooters this year, 199. Total motorized device seizures: 1,040 this year. Can you talk to us about...

(02:44:23)

...some of the operations that the Police Department has in place to help remove illegal mopeds from our communities, or mopeds that might be violating our rules? What can be challenging — I have seen, and I am sure all of us have seen, videos where they pull over and the riders take off on police officers. So it is something that I know you are really focused on. Ghost flight...

(02:44:38)

...operations. I can talk about that. That is one of the ways that we are actually able to attack the problem of mopeds. So I will just talk about ghost fleet operations real quick, if that is okay.

Okay. So with ghost fleet operations, as it pertains to the motorized device world, we have conducted 29 joint operations this year. Again, this is the multi-agency part of it: 418 arrests, 1,730 summonses issued. More importantly, 63 motorcycle and moped seizures in 2026 year to date. So that is just one way, besides the point of sale seizures, and also ghost fleet operations, especially for mopeds and motorcycles.

(02:45:29)

What are some of the challenges that the NYPD faces when it comes to enforcing moped-related rules and seizing them if...

(02:45:38)

...needed? Well, I think, as we were talking before about the challenges with e-bikes and whether you can tell if something is street legal — with mopeds that is actually easier, right? Because a moped, whether it is Class B or Class C, is like a motor vehicle or motorcycle. It is actually a class of motorcycle, which is a class of motor vehicle. It has to be licensed, has to be registered, has to have insurance. So if you have a moped with no license, or a license that is not legitimate, or if it is not registered, that is subject to enforcement action. You are going to have a summons and be subject to a seizure.

The challenge, Chair, which you alluded to, is that to the extent you have mopeds taking off on police officers, we have to be incredibly careful about that. As you know, we tightened up our vehicle pursuit policy, and for good reasons. So to the extent you have mopeds that are unlawful and are moving or fleeing from us, that presents obviously very significant safety issues. A lot of that enforcement is going to involve trying to engage with someone when they are stopped, or when the moped is parked on the street or attached to something, and then the officers are in a position to do the assessment as best they possibly can: is this a lawful moped?

And how heavy would you say... This is something that I actually observed about a year ago. I would very often see police officers driving around in a large van, looking for mopeds. Generally they would engage when the mopeds were parked, and based on what I saw they were very professional. It was a very successful operation. They were able to seize the mopeds without any incident — the mopeds were parked and the owners were sometimes not even around. How heavy would you say that operation is today compared to the last two years?

(02:47:56)

I am not sure about that specific operation. We certainly do that. I am not sure I have data right here on the number of such operations. We certainly do that and it can be a very safe and effective way to do it. If we have a whole bunch of mopeds, for example, that are parked somewhere, we can bring a team there. In this case it could be an inspection at a store, or obviously out on the street. There is no pursuit. The mopeds can be assessed. We can make sure we have the right people there in terms of expertise — members of service who have done this before and know what to look for. We can have members of the legal bureau actually on scene sometimes to help with those assessments and make sure we are doing it exactly right. So we certainly do those quite regularly, and I know that is actually a very good example of something that can be done in response to community complaints. We hear a community complaint: hey, there are a whole bunch of illegal mopeds parked out here on the street. We can get a team out there and make that assessment in a very safe and a very fair way. We can look and see if we have data on the number of such operations. I just do not have that here.

(02:49:08)

Yeah, and speaking about parked mopeds — do you have any data on the number of tickets that you have given for illegally parked mopeds? We certainly do that. There certainly is enforcement there. That is a big issue. You generally see that in commercial areas: 20 or 30 mopeds parked in the fire lane, which is obviously illegal.

(02:49:26)

And to be clear, we are going to summons and seize those devices irrespective of whether the device itself is legal or illegal. If you have parked a moped in a place where it is not lawfully allowed to be — like if you have a legal moped but you parked it on the sidewalk — that is subject to a summons and to seizure. So we will see what data we have on that. We certainly issue summonses for motor vehicles that are on a sidewalk, for example. I just have to go back and see how granular the data gets and how much we break it down.

(02:50:08)

What is the NYPD's strategy for addressing sidewalk riding, wrong way riding, red light violations, speeding and also failure to yield?

(02:50:16)

As Chief Obey said, you have just recited some of our key priorities in terms of enforcement. You have listed some of the key moving violations that go directly to safety — pedestrian safety, cyclist safety, the safety of everyone on the road — and those are what is prioritized.

(02:50:39)

Okay, a few questions, and these are questions that we briefly chatted about at our last hearing a few weeks ago. The theft of these devices — obviously we are talking about rider safety. The City, especially compared to pre-COVID numbers, has seen a drastic increase in grand larceny involving vehicles that includes mopeds. Correct?

(02:51:01)

It would include mopeds, yes. Though I will say — and much of it I am sure is where you are going — part of that spike, not all of it, has to do with issues involving four-wheel vehicles. We talked about this a few weeks ago, where there were certain types of cars that had what was probably a flaw in the manufacturing that made them very easy to steal. Criminals figured that out and realized that because of certain problems with certain types of vehicles they could steal them in record time. That is something that we have worked on in a variety of ways, including working directly with the car manufacturers to identify those problems and get them to actually fix them. So certainly part of the story there is about deficiencies in four-wheel vehicles, though you are certainly right that part of that is also going to be thefts of mopeds.

(02:51:56)

Yeah, how many grand larcenies involving vehicles or autos have we had this year compared to 2019?

(02:52:01)

Do you have that data? We do not have that here. We can absolutely get that for you.

(02:52:09)

Okay, so I looked at the data before we started the hearing and it has more than doubled — it is about 4,000 versus over 8,000, so more than doubled compared to the pre-COVID numbers. Do we think the theft of mopeds has contributed to that drastic increase? I know you mentioned it is different vehicles that are easier to steal, but I am wondering whether mopeds have played a role. I have to say anecdotally I would think yes, but I do not want to say that definitively without looking at the data. That is something we certainly do have data on that we can look at, and I think we can get back to you with a more precise answer.

Okay, yeah, if you could get us some data on that it would be great. So a few final questions on the trade-in programs that we have been working on these past few years. A few years ago we also passed the trade-in legislation requiring a study to create a program where riders are able to trade in their uncertified bikes or batteries for one that is certified and safe. Can you provide any updates on that, including how many certified batteries you have been able to provide?

(02:54:00)

Sure, Chair. I can start by talking about Local Law 39 with respect to micro mobility. We have had a very active year in terms of our point of sale inspections. We conducted inspections of 294 unique businesses in 2026. That is more than a 50% increase from what we saw in all of 2025, and we are seeing encouraging compliance trends. About 53 of those businesses were in violation. The vast majority were in compliance, and others that we began to cite came into compliance. With respect to motorized scooters, we issued summonses for violations of the motorized scooter law in 2026. So we are encouraged by the trends, but we are going to continue aggressive compliance sweeps to ensure that these noncompliance figures continue to go down. Do we currently have sufficient authority to prevent devices from being sold online?

(02:54:58)

I think it is harder online, and that is why we have been working with the Department of Transportation. You saw the announcement by the Mayor and I believe by Commissioner Flynn a couple of months ago about a pretty significant enforcement sweep. We certainly issue summonses to online businesses. We do that all the time. If they are outside of the City that can be harder to serve, but we are working closely on that.

(02:55:28)

Well, I think on the cease and desist for online sales, so far we have been very encouraged. I do not have the exact number, but I think over a dozen online retailers have already complied and we are in active discussions with most of the remainder. We have also learned that some online retailers are more scrupulous than others, and if we see things like not including the specs or other ways to make it harder... As Commissioner Levin said, it is definitely more tricky on the online side of it. And then of course there is the secondary sales market too. So it just underscores the need for a real nuanced approach, and I think a lot of the Bills being considered today can help us keep evolving.

(02:56:19)

How many summonses have been given due to the sale of these devices online? I believe we have issued 86 cease and desist letters, and we have issued — is that for 2026? — and then we have issued 41 summonses to online sellers that do not comply with the cease and desist letters. I think that is cumulative.

Okay. A few final questions on the trade-in programs that we have been working on these past few years. A few years ago we also passed the trade-in legislation requiring a study to create a program where riders are able to trade in their uncertified bikes or batteries for one that is certified and safe. Can you provide any updates on that, including how many certified batteries you have been able to provide?

(02:57:15)

Yes, sure. Well, I think you know that that local law — I believe it was Local Law 95, I may be mistaken — it provided the companies with a lot of flexibility on how they could comply with the law. There were different models they could use, whether it was replacing bikes or offering some discounts on rental subscriptions, for example, so it gave them a lot of flexibility in how they could comply. I think towards the end of last year we had worked with our colleagues at City Hall to issue letters to all the companies letting them know that they were on notice and had to be in compliance. We followed up earlier this year to ensure that they would map out for us their plans for compliance as well. Thus far we have received no complaints from a worker about not receiving some type of vehicle, either through the rental subscription model or not. I think most of the apps, if not all, are using the rental subscription model as how to comply with this. That said, I think there are ways we can strengthen this access to safe devices and I know our partners are working on that actively as well.

(02:58:23)

OK, and going back to the issue related to enforcement at the point of sale, can you talk to us about the procedures and operations for us? These are the rules related to the point of sale. I know this could be challenging, so just wondering what the procedures are.

(02:58:38)

It is not challenging at all. It is something that we have done since 2021, and again in phase one we do this in phases. At that time the focus was on mopeds. We transitioned in January 2026 to high-powered and out-of-class scooters. So again, we do this work — first we tapped into our local precincts, 78 of them citywide, to survey their command and identify retailers that are selling these devices. They came back to us with 71 retailers identified citywide selling these illegal devices. We reach out to them, they do the educational outreach part of it. We provided a flyer, and that flyer is instrumental to us in the sense that we provided it to our officers to help make that distinction between whether a device is legal or non-street-legal. It is helpful, just some of that language around it, and we also provided that to the retailers. So there has been notice given to these retailers. After we do that with the flyers, then inspections start, and then enforcement. Those are the steps that we have taken. As I mentioned, 63 retail stores were inspected as of September 21. From those 63 retail stores, 90 bikes were seized from various locations, and again this is citywide. Nine summonses were issued for motorized scooter noncompliance. 57 criminal summonses were issued for other retail violations, for the most part at repeat locations. We have to expand this and we will do so, but again we work hand in hand on this.

(03:00:33)

OK, some final questions related to e-bike infrastructure. Are riders able to legally ride any bike or micro-mobility device in a bus lane?

(03:00:55)

It happens all the time, by the way, and I think it is a great idea, but of course we have got to make sure it is safe. I do not want to speak out of turn, so let me just confirm that with the team and circle back to that question. Sure.

(03:01:07)

Okay, so you are not sure about the legality. Do you think it would be a good idea to explore that idea and allow micro-mobility device users to use bus lanes? I think some cities have started doing that, if I am correct.

(03:01:17)

I think it is definitely a question that we are asking. You know, I mentioned earlier that we are obviously aware of the two recent crashes in bus lanes or busways, and whether... we will have to see to what

(03:01:32)

extent NYPD does their investigation. You know, that was a factor, but it is something we look at and we have to. For sure, it is something that we are going to be thinking about, especially as we expand the mileage of bus lanes and busways across the City. Everything we do with streets is a trade-off, right? Because we have limited space, so we always have to think about how to maximize safety, accessibility and mobility for all users. But we cannot always do everything on every street, so that is something we will be looking at closely.

(03:02:05)

OK, and what are the steps that the NYPD or any other agency takes when bike lanes are blocked — let's say by garbage, by cars, or, for example, Park Avenue in the Bronx has a lot of car mechanics and you generally see very large car parts completely blocking up the bike lane? What steps do we take on each of those issues when they are blocking a bike lane? So again — garbage, cars, car parts, homeless encampments, anything else that could potentially block a bike lane.

Well, certainly, for example, on the car parts: if we get a report — it could be a 311 call or otherwise — of, let's say, a vehicle blocking a bike lane or something like that, officers are going to respond. We are going to address the condition, right? It is going to get removed and seized, and we will summons the individual responsible. I guess it is case by case, but this is actually a big part of what the Q Teams do, right? They are responding to community complaints. I think that is the scenario we are talking about: someone calls in and says, hey, the bike lane that I use every day is obstructed by someone's vehicle. We are obviously going to respond and address the condition.

(03:03:28)

Do you have any data on that — how many tickets you have given out for blocking a bike lane? I do not think we have it here, but we will certainly pull the data we have and we are happy to provide it.

(03:03:40)

Okay. What are the steps that DOT takes when a bike lane is blocked by other...

(03:03:42)

...things? Garbage, homeless encampments, car parts, anything that could potentially block a bike lane.

(03:03:50)

Well, I would put the homeless encampments to the side because that is something that is really for the Department of Homeless Services to handle. In terms of other things, again, if we get a 311 call like that, it gets referred to us. When it comes to us, the Q Teams are going to respond and their responsibility is to address the condition.

(03:04:12)

If what you see is a homeless person in a bike lane, are you guys able to refer the case to DHS, give them information about it so they could...

(03:04:21)

I mean, we certainly would make the appropriate notifications, but again, if you are asking about clearing homeless encampments, that is really going to be a matter for...

(03:04:31)

Yeah. Okay. I do not have any more questions for now.

(03:04:33)

Thank you. And I promised the panel a restroom break in the next 10 minutes. Quickly, CM Won has a question, followed by Public Advocate Jumaane Williams.

(03:04:45)

Good afternoon. Thank you, Chair, very much for this important hearing. It is good to see you all, Commissioners and teams. I just have one question in particular for Commissioner Flynn. I know this is an issue we have talked about a bunch, and I just want to take a step back for a second. It is very clear why this hearing is so important: our streets are being used in so many different ways, those uses are proliferating and they are outpacing our current efforts to address them, and so that gap is what we as a City need to address. There are different ways to do so. We have talked a lot about enforcement. There is also design, and I want to talk about design in particular.

As you know, Commissioner Flynn, I have been a big champion of public spaces and safe streets. We have in Jackson Heights our 34th Avenue open street and linear park, which is the longest and most successful open street in the City. I wanted to address the fact that we have seen a large number of mopeds speeding down our open street. We have got six public schools there. I am hearing repeatedly of children being hit or almost hit by mopeds. Seniors — just last week a constituent let me know that his five-year-old child was hit by a moped on the way to pre-K.

The design solution that I think works very effectively is that mopeds are using the bike lane on our open street, even though they are class three motor vehicles, because they would rather go on a street for pedestrians than go on the street with cars. That is what we need to address. Northern Boulevard presents a really important opportunity for a micro-mobility lane — one that will allow mopeds to go where they should go and not in a pedestrianized space like our open street. It would make the open street and the neighborhood a lot safer. I know that there is a bus lane on Northern Boulevard too, but I maintain that there are creative ways to ensure we have public transit like buses and a micro-mobility lane as well, and we can figure that out together.

So I just wanted to get a sense — and this is a solution, by the way, a micro-mobility lane on Northern Boulevard — it is supported by the safe streets advocates, my constituents and the delivery workers, because it gives them safe passage as they go. It is an all-around winning solution. So I know we have talked about it a bunch. I just would like to know your willingness and openness to work with me as an agency to create a micro-mobility lane on Northern Boulevard and make the streets safer for all users.

(03:07:05)

Thank you so much, Council Member, and I appreciate your thoughtful framing of the issue. It is interesting, right? We have kind of two things that have been evolving rapidly in parallel since COVID. We have really seen an expansion — and it continues to be a priority — of pedestrian space, and more, higher and better use of some of our streets. 34th Avenue is a great example. At the same time we have seen this evolution in the micro-mobility space that we are talking about today, that comes with challenges. 34th Avenue and Northern Boulevard are a really interesting case study in terms of how we approach these issues. As I mentioned a moment ago, every street cannot always do everything, and so we have to look at a network level as well. There are challenges with that corridor. We have identified Northern Boulevard as one of our bus priority corridors in our Bus Action Plan, so there is a question of how we try to do all of these things.

So to your last question, I would absolutely commit to having those conversations and trying to find the best possible solution. I will say, in terms of the infrastructure side more broadly, DOT is really excited and proud that the Mayor has made a historic level of investment in DOT and in our resources to ramp up our output. We are definitely on track for a record level this year of bus, bike and other improvements like that. I do want to clarify one thing, which gets back to the Chair's point earlier about mopeds: mopeds specifically are actually not allowed to be in bike lanes, so we would have to think about what a solution would really mean for mopeds specifically. You know, that works in that regard for class... e-bikes and legal bikes can use bike lanes, so it is just about those nuances. Thank you.

(03:08:51)

And if you could just follow up with the Council Member's district-specific requests, that would be great.

(03:08:55)

Public Advocate Jumaane Williams, thank you very much. First, this chair still fits very well, so it has been... Good morning — as mentioned, my name is Jumaane Williams, Public Advocate for the City

(03:09:14)

of New York. I want to thank Speaker Menin, Majority Leader Brad Hoylman-Sigal and the members of this committee for holding this important hearing and for allowing me to give this opening statement on this major transportation transition. As more and more New Yorkers utilize electric bikes and similar vehicles, we have a responsibility as lawmakers to update the regulations that shape the operation of our streets accordingly. Unfortunately, despite legal reform and significant infrastructure investments, including roadway redesigns in recent years, the streets are still unacceptably dangerous. City data indicates that there have been over 150 vehicle collisions in 2026 so far, resulting in over 90 deaths. One of these horrific incidents took the life of a teenage boy riding an electric bicycle right in front of my office this summer.

I commend the Council for spotlighting this issue and for the many pieces of legislation that members have introduced to improve this dire situation. It is vital that the City appropriately regulate electric bicycles and similar vehicles as their use continues to grow. At the same time, I do want to highlight that only 16% of the vehicle collisions causing injuries or death this year so far have involved micro-mobility vehicles in any capacity. In 2025, New Yorkers were over 42 times more likely to be injured by a car than by a micro-mobility vehicle, and 35 times more likely to be killed. I mention that not because any harm is more important than the other — I want to recognize all of the harm — I mention it because anytime we try to do any kind of change to car culture, the pushback is severe, and so I just want to make sure we are clear about that.

(03:10:50)

My office has reviewed the administration's recently released Vision Zero Reimagined report and I believe that it provides a foundation for further opportunities to strengthen the City's Vision Zero efforts. I thank the Council for the Vision Zero data analysis released by Speaker Menin and Majority Leader Hoylman-Sigal for their commitment to holding a Vision Zero hearing this year. I hope that the Council passes the micro-mobility bills and many of the pieces of legislation here. I know there is not a lot of time, but I am going to submit into the record the feelings that we have on many of the pieces of legislation

(03:11:21)

that are here. I do want to highlight CM Won's universal lighting bill, Int 0511, I think it is extremely important for preventing both car and micro-mobility vehicle collisions. I do want to say, having lived and been born and bred in the City for 50 years, I just want to be clear — and I say this all the time — when I am walking as a pedestrian, I am very angry at the bicycles and the cars. When I am on my bicycle riding around, I am very angry at the pedestrians and drivers. And when I am driving my car, I am very angry at the bicycles and the pedestrians. I just say that because it is very true that we are all human, and just make sure that we understand that we all have a part to play in keeping everybody safe. That is important, without ignoring that there are people who unfortunately violate the laws — that includes our bicyclists and people on illegal mopeds — that we do have to get off the street.

So I want to work with everyone here to make sure that we are doing this with the lens of humanity for everyone and preventing everybody from being harmed. I appreciate the opportunity to speak. I did have one question to end this. I know there is an issue that we do not have the technology to know when folks are speeding on mopeds and bicycles. So how do we determine that when we want to enforce speeding regulations?

So I think what we are referring to is the dynamometer issue we were talking about earlier. To be clear, the challenge is being able to determine what the maximum speed is of the device. To be clear about the question: if I think someone is speeding on a moped — many of them should not be on a bike lane — an electric bike that is going too fast, how do we know if it is going too fast?

(03:13:07)

Okay, I believe you do not know.

(03:13:12)

Okay, so the question on speed and how we currently enforce speeding: there are two ways. First, we have a device called LIDAR — that is L-I-D-A-R. I apologize, I do not have the full acronym. It is used just like... it is similar to what the highway officers use on the highway. It is pointed towards the device itself and it is able to record speed. The other way is that an officer has to essentially say, based on my own professional experience, I can determine that this particular device was going at a certain speed because of near misses — you know, we had pedestrians jump out of the way, that type of thing — or I was in my vehicle...

(03:13:58)

Just to be clear: you have situations where there is reckless driving and the person will in fact be going way over the speed limit. We may not be able to capture that in terms of a number, but to the extent they are operating their device recklessly — and again, this is true for anyone, right? This would be true for a driver of a four-wheeled vehicle, a traditional bicycle, a micro-mobility device, whatever it may be — if someone is driving recklessly over the speed limit, they are subject to a summons. And then separately there are circumstances where we have the technology to assess the speed at which a device is actually operating. What we cannot do is assess what the maximum speed of a particular device is.

(03:14:41)

Okay. Thank you, Chair. Just for clarity: there is a device now that you can use, and then you use the experience of officers to see if someone is speeding. That is correct. Thank you.

(03:14:52)

Thank you. Thank you, Advocate. With that, I will give the panel a five-minute restroom break.

(03:15:10)

Ladies and gentlemen, keep the noise down, please. We will be resuming shortly. Please find your seats. Take your conversations to the rotunda. Thank you. Please keep it down in the chambers. Thank you very much. Sergeants, am I able to begin?

(03:24:59)

As we wait for certain Council members to get back, I will just move on to CM

(03:25:19)

Wilson. Thank you, Chair. Commissioner, in your testimony you said that the sidewalk detection technology is ineffective, or that it does not work very well. I was wondering if you could tell me a little bit about what research informed that decision or that determination.

(03:25:42)

Sure. I will need to check the specifics of the research we did, but I know that we are constantly monitoring what is out there and tracking the industry and seeing what is available. I think it is based on observation and awareness of what products are out there. We are involved with various industry groups where we trade information and things like that. We are always trying to stay at the forefront. We have had conversations with some of the operators as well and some peer cities. So at a high level, that is sort of what it is based on. I mean, I would want to

(03:26:21)

reiterate that we are certainly strongly in support of the goal, so it is really just about trying to identify the specific tools that can get us there. Just in conversations like that I have had with folks in the industry, they tell us that this technology does exist and that it can work.

(03:26:38)

Like how often is that reviewed? How often are you checking? You said all the time, but what does that really mean? I am not sure I can quantify it, but we have a team pretty devoted to Vision Zero policy research and analysis. They are involved with different groups. We talk to the manufacturers. As you can imagine, the manufacturers come to us a lot. Everybody has a product. Everybody says their product can do everything and it is great, and then we have to try to unpack it a bit. So I mean, we are hopeful that the technology can get there, but at this moment we are not confident.

(03:27:17)

Are there certain benchmarks that you would be looking to meet in order to say that this technology is accurate and could work? Yeah, I think our biggest concern is where you have, let us say, a curbside bike lane that is right next to the sidewalk. Is the geo-fencing or the tracking, basically, of the location sensitive enough to be able to distinguish that? Such that if you are in the roadway on a device and it thinks you are on the sidewalk and starts to slow you down, what might the consequences of that be? That is our concern. I think, as a general rule, we always want to explore new things, but because of the scale of New York and the implications — legal liability, costs, whatever they may be — in a city this big, we want to do pilot projects. We want to kind of see something, we want to learn from other places before we commit to large-scale adoption here.

(03:28:21)

Thank you, Council members. Since we are on the topic and I would rather not bring it up later, I will just ask now. We have seen a rideshare system that is going to be using this for their entire fleet. We did a demonstration with the Speaker and it was very impressive. We were very, very impressed by the technology. Within a few seconds the bikes slow down. It is not an immediate shutoff, so it is not dangerous. It is a slowdown. After two seconds, if it gets on the sidewalk, it slows down to the point where it becomes like a regular bike. It never just stops. So if you are traveling at a normal bike speed, there should never be a situation where it is actually dangerous.

(03:29:06)

Understood. Chair, I am reminded we are actually meeting with them soon, so we are looking forward to learning more. I know, again,

(03:29:17)

we will see. There are different perspectives, and then there is sort of looking at something at a small scale and then scaling it up. So we are certainly open to these kinds of ideas. If the technology, if your engagement with them and your view of the technology is impressive, we certainly would like to have follow-up on that. Because, to your point, I do believe that technology can get there and should be getting there. But once big operators, you know, operators like Citi Bike, have a large fleet, obviously not as big as some other actors, but if they are able to do that, it is important that we also regulate the right shape of the ecosystem as a whole. Because you do not want to create an incentive for people to not use Citi Bike because it slows them down on the sidewalk. It would have to be evenly applied. So assuming the technology is there, would you be in support of this legislation?

(03:30:09)

Yeah, that is a great point about the overall market. Again, we are very supportive of the intent and would be eager to sit down and look at it with you and work through some of these questions.

(03:30:23)

If the technology is there, I think we should be requiring bikes to slow down on sidewalks as part of your systems. That is my view. Thank you very much.

(03:30:38)

I had a set of questions, but they were already asked, so I was just going to make a statement. We have held multiple hearings, we have introduced legislation on the bikes, we have held press conferences, rallies and written op-eds. We are going to keep doing that until the cows come home or until they ride down the bike lane the wrong way. But none of it means much if the City is reluctant or refuses to enforce the laws already on the books. My predecessor, Robert Holden, advanced Priscilla's Law after Priscilla Lora was killed while legally crossing the street with the light. The e-bike rider ran a red light, struck her and tried to flee. Too often victims and their families are left without accountability because these vehicles have no license plates, riders cannot be identified, and enforcement is simply not taken seriously because there is no way to locate them. I am also thinking about my constituent, Theresa Valenti, who was killed near the Brooklyn Navy Yard by two people riding a souped-up e-bike. Her death was not only a failure of enforcement. It was also a failure of street design. In fact, these souped-up kits are still available. When I checked this morning, you can still go online and buy them.

(03:32:15)

And we have to talk about how we are going to close that loop, because there is no system in place to stop any bike rider from ordering these kits and souping up their bikes. Theresa Valenti got off a bus and was forced to cross a bike lane on the sidewalk just to reach the pedestrian path, and that is dangerous, nonsensical design. DOT approved it, and in fact even today that bike lane is still there in the same location, waiting for the next accident to happen. I can name many other streets with that design in New York City. So this is a two-part problem: weak enforcement against reckless and illegal behavior, and DOT too often designing streets without basic common sense or adequate regard for pedestrian safety. We do not need another glossy announcement. We need serious enforcement, real accountability, safer street design and the willingness to make clear that pedestrians — not reckless riders, not illegal high-speed devices and not corporate delivery platforms — come first. Thank you.

(03:33:36)

That is just a statement. All right.

(03:33:38)

Please keep it down in the chambers. Thank you. All right. CM

(03:33:48)

Paladino. Good afternoon, everybody. First of all, let me echo what my colleague CM Phil Wong just said. Phil, you are one hundred percent right, as was Bob Holden when he introduced Priscilla's Law. Again, like we talked about earlier, Phil just said that nothing is going to work unless something is enforced. This is absolutely clear. This is nothing, you know. I am looking at this hearing. This is again and again and again and again. We

(03:34:27)

have allowed — this City has allowed — the bike industry to take over our streets, and all we are hearing about here today is how people are getting hurt, how they are supposed to be on safe streets. Okay, there are no safe streets so long as these bike riders own the streets and drive on them as if they own it. Then you go to the cops and you talk to the police officers: what are you doing to enforce the law? What are they supposed to do if the law is not even being enforced? None of these people are registered or insured. They flee, and what happens to the police officer when they pursue and chase? They get in trouble. Enough is enough. We are sitting here in City Council today to try to rectify a situation that has been allowed to get out of control.

Also, please keep it down. Let the Council member speak. Thank you. This is what the bike culture has become in New York City, and we have the bike lobby, led by the lobbying group otherwise known as Transportation Alternatives and their propaganda outlet known as Streetsblog, to thank for it. Does anybody know about the young guy, 41 years old, who was killed in Central Park yesterday by a bike rider? 41 years old in Central Park. Why? Because they are using Central Park as if it is some sort of racetrack. Enough is enough. You want to pull this in? Get these bikes under control. We have to start from scratch, to tell you the honest truth. This has all got to be pulled back. I know I am speaking in terms that you do not want to hear, but the reality is we let this go wild with no accountability. And now here we sit. I have been sitting in this chair for four years and six months, and you know what? Nothing has changed. It has only gotten worse. You show me a street design that works. We had CM Krishnan talking about how his safe streets work, and now all of a sudden the bike riders are taking over his safe streets. Is that new to anybody? Thank you. The problem lies right here. We have got to get enforcement — real enforcement. This is ridiculous. Thank you.

(03:37:01)

Thank you, Council member. Please keep it down. CM Aldebol, followed by Brooks-Powers.

(03:37:14)

Good afternoon — we are in the afternoon now, okay. Thank you for speaking today. I have this issue in my district. I do not have share e-bikes in my district. We have scooters. The big issue is that a lot of kids, underage children, are riding the e-bikes and scooters, riding them on the sidewalks unsafely, without helmets. Even your 16 and 17 year olds who are allowed to ride the e-scooters — none of this is being enforced. The age requirement is not being enforced. Riding on the sidewalks is not being enforced. It is a serious problem. We get a tremendous number of complaints through my office. At every meeting that I go to, there are complaints about kids riding the e-bikes. I am not blaming all the issues on the kids, but it is a problem that is increasing and not being enforced. You sometimes have three kids riding on a scooter at a time, weaving in and out of traffic, weaving in and out of pedestrian traffic on the sidewalks. It is a serious problem. Do you have any data or any way that we can have the e-scooter companies ensure that underage children are not riding? Or any way that we can enforce safety for these rideshare companies? Because I blame the rideshare companies. Somehow it is being allowed and the rideshare companies are not doing anything about it. They do not care as long as they are making money. Do you have any recommendations or any data on this? Thank you.

(03:39:37)

Council member, I think there are a couple of dimensions to that. We have seen an increase in both privately owned as well as shared micromobility. Obviously those have somewhat different solutions, different approaches to how we might solve them. If it is privately owned devices and parents are letting their kids do it, that is one thing. Education for us would be a big piece. For the shared programs, like the shared scooters, for Citi Bike you have to be 16 or older, and for the scooter share you need to be 18 or older. We talked earlier about age verification, and as I mentioned, we are committed to finding a solution that can both ensure the safety of young New Yorkers on our streets as well as their privacy. So it is something we are certainly committed to and we are actively working through.

(03:40:31)

Thank you. Sorry, Council member, your time is up. Okay. Thank you. CM Brooks-Powers, she is going to give her opening and then we will start the clock when she starts her questions, please.

(03:40:40)

Not yet. Thank you, Chair, and to all of the chairs and members of the committees for hearing my legislation as part of today's package. Our streets are changing fast. E-biking serves as an essential mode of transportation for New Yorkers every day and a key source of income for thousands of delivery workers, but illegally operated, uncertified vehicles have raised real and urgent public safety concerns. The two bills I am sponsoring today, Int 0110-2026 and Int 0787-2026, help hold accountable the businesses that profit from the delivery system and increase reporting and transparency on how the City conducts traffic enforcement on these vehicles.

Int 0110-2026 would expand the City's commercial bicycle laws to cover all electric bicycles, mopeds and motorcycles. This places responsibility for the safety and oversight of these vehicles where it belongs: on the businesses and apps that profit from delivery. Businesses that use such delivery services for commercial purposes would be required to provide safety equipment, identification and safety information to their delivery workers, as well as maintain records of their delivery workers. Int 0787-2026 would require the NYPD to report quarterly on its targeted traffic enforcement: where these operations occur, how the decision to conduct them is made, the number of summonses issued, and specifically enforcement directed at e-bike riders, with a year-over-year comparison.

As part of this full package, the City will work to enforce safer streets, and this Bill allows the public and this Council to know how it is happening and who is being targeted. In previous hearings of the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, we were unable to get clear data on where e-bike and scooter violations were most prevalent. So this Bill aims to bring that data forward. Together, these bills and this full package help bring solutions that do not just criminalize delivery workers, but make us safer by understanding the real dangers for all e-bike and scooter operations. We can do that while protecting New Yorkers who depend on these vehicles to make a living or just to get around. I want to thank the advocates, the workers, my colleagues and every New Yorker who continues to inform this work. I look forward to working with the chairs and the committees to move Int 0110-2026 and Int 0787-2026 forward and to hearing from all stakeholders today. Thank you.

(03:43:34)

Now we will start the time for questions. Thank you.

(03:43:40)

I wanted to ask a couple of questions on my legislation. I will just ask them and can repeat whatever needs to be repeated. In the interest of time, particularly regarding Int 0110-2026 for commercial bicycle laws covering e-bikes used commercially, how is the department currently enforcing the existing commercial bicycle requirements and does it have the capacity to extend that enforcement to these vehicles?

(03:44:12)

What would the department need to require and verify that businesses provide safety equipment, identification and safety information to their delivery workers under Int 0110, and then for Int 0787 — always good to see you — targeted traffic enforcement: does NYPD currently track its targeted enforcement operations in a way that would let it produce this report, and if not, what is the gap that exists? And then how does it currently decide where and when to implement targeted traffic enforcement directed at e-bike and e-scooter riders? And for both agencies, under Int 0787, several bills today — Int 0787, Int 0989, Int 1050 — create new reporting. How will the administration make that data consistent and shared across agencies rather than siloed? So generally, how do the relevant agencies here today, NYPD, coordinate your data and needs with one another so that we can really use it and see what we are trying to find through the data? Thank you.

(03:45:38)

Thank you very much, Council Member. There were a few questions there, so I will maybe start at a higher level and then happy to dive in if I missed anything. So I just want to be clear: for Int 0110, we support the bill and look forward to working with the Council to strengthen and modernize the commercial bicycle law to reflect today's landscape. We agree the requirements and protections should apply to delivery workers regardless of what device they use, and that this bill would help modernize that section of the law to ensure workers on devices other than e-bikes are also covered. Most urgently, moped users, which we know are currently excluded, and this bill would close that loophole. We are looking forward to talking more about any specific recommendations we have.

(03:46:28)

Keep it down in the chamber. Let the commissioner speak. Please keep it down in the chamber. Thank you.

(03:46:41)

So yeah, we know the landscape has changed a lot and we are looking forward to working with you on exactly how to refine it. I think you asked about resources, Council Member. We are always evaluating that, and we collaborate a lot with our partner agencies as well. So I think that is something we are comfortable with.

(03:46:59)

Yeah, I guess if there were specific other questions... Majority Whip Hanks.

(03:47:05)

Sorry, if I could just answer their questions, please.

(03:47:12)

So there are a number of questions there for us. I am going to answer some of them and then I think Chief Obey is going to take the question about the factors that go into deployment decisions. With regard to Int 0787, I totally understand what is behind the bill and understand that you are looking for data about outcomes, the different types of enforcement taken and where it is happening. I understand that and have no objection to that, and am happy to work with you on a bill that gets you what you need.

The one place where we do want to have a conversation with you, Council Member, in your office, is I am not sure — and I am not sure if it is intentional — but there is a way to read the bill that would seem to potentially require imposing a disclosure obligation or reporting obligations, you know, like every time Chief Obey is making a decision about the deployment of resources and explaining what is going into that. I am not sure that is what was intended, but to the extent we would have to report every time Chief Obey is making deployment decisions and what is behind that — I mean, that happens every day, sometimes multiple times a day. That would be very challenging, particularly to the extent the bill would require us to explain potentially every shift in deployment and what is behind that. That would be very challenging. It is not typically what we see in reporting bills.

But I do want to emphasize that in terms of where we are doing enforcement, the types of enforcement and how that looks geographically, I have no objection to getting you that information in the form that will make it most useful to you, to other City agencies and to the public. We do share data with DOT. For your question regarding how the department thinks about deployment in this space, I want to turn it over to Chief Obey.

(03:49:18)

Good afternoon. So I just want to put it simply by saying we go where the data is. One of the things that we do is we focus on high-visibility corridors. I mentioned that earlier and I will go through very quickly: 15 corridors identified citywide. The decisions behind the identification process for those corridors are really based on spikes in fatalities, collisions and injuries — where we saw spikes along those criteria. One such corridor I mentioned previously here was Ocean Parkway. Last year, one of the things we do when we see a horrible incident like that horrific collision — three fatalities — we get together, we put all resources at it, right? Again, that corridor gets extra commands. So essentially all 15 corridors touch the entire city. Year to date 2026, fatalities and total collisions are down along the Ocean Parkway corridor, total injuries down, moving violations up and zero movers up. When you look broadly among all 15 corridors, there is a decrease in fatalities — that is always our number one goal, to drive down the numbers along those 15 corridors. It is 11 versus 17, down six fatalities. Again, every life lost is one too many, but there is a decrease in total collisions. Zero movers overall for all 15 corridors year to date: 74,207 moving violations

(03:50:49)

issued along those 15 corridors. So this is the type of attention we put along — so that is one strategy.

(03:50:56)

Another thing also is ghost plate operations. We kind of hit that two ways. Very quickly, we work with law enforcement partners — the Port Authority Police Department, just to name a few. This year, year to date 2026: 29 joint operations. And again, ghost plates — it goes to plates on cars that display fraud, expired, mismatched, no plates, all of that. That world: 418 arrests, 17,000-plus summonses issued, 1,817 vehicles seized and 63 motorcycle and moped seizures. And then also locally, responding to community complaints, we will see apart from obstructed plate parking summonses — they have written 16,236 summonses. This is again by our uniform personnel. This is obstructed plate moving summonses: 20,719 arrests made for temp tag fraud and arrests: 1,833 year to date. So we have that just broken down.

I also wanted to mention the third thing that we see, which helps us move from spot to spot — again, just looking at spikes. One thing we have seen recently is two things: lack of seatbelt compliance. When you see that, it means occupants are being ejected out of vehicles. We will attack that by reaching out to our partners, New York City and New York State. So when you look on the highways you see "buckle up" and that type of awareness, but we have short-term initiatives to address that along certain corridors. Speed is one of the things we will do. In this particular case, after a rash of tragic incidents, speed and seatbelts. As it changes, the micro-mobility world — we mentioned this earlier — point-of-sale initiatives. We started that in 2021 and continue this year. I would say with great success. The work has not ended with identifying additional retailers and we will continue to do so. Again, our enforcement — we have the enforcement numbers. We do target a number of violations, the worst of the worst, and that is reckless driving,

(03:53:10)

disobeying a steady red light, disobeying a traffic control device, speeding. Thank you, Chief Obey. I see you have a very responsive answer there.

(03:53:19)

Appreciate it. I am now going to turn it over to Majority Whip Hanks.

(03:53:23)

Thank you so much, Chair, and thank you all for coming here today. It is a long hearing. And yes, that response was very thorough — I learned a few things. So of course I am always going to go with the Staten Island enforcement and results in questions that really relate to our outer boroughs. So the report gives citywide injury and death tolls but no Staten Island or precinct breakdown. So Int 0787 would require reports on targeted traffic enforcement. Can you tell us, for the same period, how many e-bike, scooter and moped riders were injured or killed in Staten Island's 120 and 121 precincts compared to last year?

So I do not have that on me, but we can get that — we will get back to you on that. That is great. I actually own a Vespa, OK, full transparency. And just as a follow-up: what seizures or summonses occurred in those precincts, and will you work with the outer borough local elected officials to make sure that these figures are published regularly? Violation figures? Absolutely. We will get you the data and also run them — you know what you asked from us. Thank you.

So this is regarding the Class C ban and how that would work. Int 0244 would ban sales and rentals of Class C e-bikes with civil penalties up to $2,000. It addresses sellers. A separate proposal on the agenda addresses riding these bikes. How would Staten Island workers access the trade-in program proposed by Int 0985? And how would the Department of Consumer and Worker Protection enforce Int 0244 against online sellers serving New York City?

(03:55:14)

Well, I think, Council Member, maybe I will then turn it over to Commissioner Flynn.

(03:55:19)

So in terms of enforcement, we will pursue the same strategy we have been pursuing, which is really a dual-part strategy. We want to get out and educate the businesses. We then do inspections. If we see violations, we issue summonses. If we see repeated violations, we will actually go ahead and seal the business. Online, as I testified earlier, can be a little harder. We have been partnering closely with others on this. We have been issuing a number of summonses to online businesses. I believe we have sent some cease-and-desist demands to online businesses. I would say the pace of that is only going to increase, and we are really going to encourage members of the public who encounter these devices illegally to let us know about them so we can take follow-up action. You are going to see a whole-of-government approach to enforcement there.

(03:56:01)

So that would lead me to the follow-up: what do you need from the public? What do you need from us to help — help us help you? Because in Staten Island we have those four-wheelers, and we now know that law enforcement will not give chase, they will not try to pursue any person riding these four-wheelers. But the public also does not really understand or know how to report these. It has become a big trend where there will be 20 or 30 riders in a particular neighborhood. We will call and they will say, well, we cannot give chase, we have to kind of figure out where they are going to park and then we can go after them after that. So...

(03:56:53)

A few points. First, I want to say that with regard to the vehicle pursuit policy issue, we did tighten it up substantially. There are, of course, times when we do

(03:57:02)

give pursuit for felonies and certain types of misdemeanors, but you are right — we are not talking about that class of crimes. Otherwise, we are not going to be engaged in what can be very dangerous vehicle pursuits. So in terms of enforcement, this is very important for the department. You cannot ride on the streets of New York City, period.

(03:57:28)

And we were saying earlier, we often run those operations and we do targeted enforcement, and we will send teams out. But, you know, for example, if we know there are a number of vehicles that are parked somewhere, that is an opportunity. I do want to engage with people when the vehicle is stationary. So to the extent the concern you are expressing is that in your district we are not being responsive in the way we want to be responsive — that is something that is actually very important. We are collectively happy to work with you and your office in identifying these issues and working with the commands there to be responsive.

(03:58:14)

Thank you very much. All right, I know the public testimony is waiting — I know you guys are getting a little impatient, I am getting messages — but we have the administration here and we still have a few more important questions to ask. In response to Local Law 15 of 2021, which set minimum hourly pay rates for app-based delivery workers, as of April 1, 2026, in order to lower operating costs, the new pay structure may incentivize companies to try to squeeze as many trips per hour out of each worker. Has the administration examined whether trips per hour per worker has increased since Local Law 15 of 2021 was enacted?

Well, I think that observation is spot on, Chair. I was just having conversations during the break with some of the delivery workers who are in the audience about the immense pressure they feel to hit these deliveries on time or face worse. I think the reality is that is our inference, but we do need to see more data on it. And that is why we would support the legislation for the companies to provide additional traffic data, safety data and trip time data. As both of us have expressed, we think that data should go to DOT. But I can assure you once again that our department is going to be working very closely together to ensure that we have a framework that is holistic and that addresses these company incentives that are putting all of us at risk. Thank you.

(03:59:47)

My bill, Int 1069, will directly address this issue by requiring trip-level data and requiring DOT to use that information to set rules around safe delivery time standards. We need to make sure that in the transition from trip-based to time-based pay for delivery workers, we are not giving companies license to push delivery workers to make unsafe decisions in a race to keep up with unrealistic timeframes and expectations. I was pleased to see in the recent Vision Zero report that obtaining trip-level data from delivery companies is also one of the administration's priorities. Can you speak to why trip-level data, compared to more high-level data, is so vital for understanding and addressing delivery time conditions, and how does this data differ from the data that you already collect from third-party delivery companies?

(04:00:41)

Thank you, Chair. Yeah, it is really critical for us because right now, as the commissioner said, we have little to no insight into how the incentives of these delivery algorithms basically play out. In order to correlate how different incentives, or number of trips, or length of trips, or time of trips, or location of trips relate to the safety outcomes, we need that trip-level data. We need it disaggregated. We want to preserve privacy, obviously, but we really need that, and ideally we need it connected to the crash data at the trip-to-crash level so we can directly correlate it.

(04:01:29)

Thank you. Now the next set of questions are actually for you, Commissioner Flynn, and then I will hopefully be done soon. In June 2023, the Parks Department launched a pilot

(04:01:41)

program to allow the use of street-legal bikes and scooters on park drives and greenways, which is expected to end on December 31, 2026. While the Parks Department is not one of the agencies represented here today, DOT and NYPD both play a role in the regulation of the operation of micro-mobility devices on park drives and greenways. So I have a few questions about the pilot program that I am hoping you can provide some insights on. To start, can you please describe how NYPD works with the Parks Department to enforce the laws governing the operation of micro-mobility devices in parks and greenways, including with respect to the ongoing pilot?

(04:02:22)

Thank you, Chair. We work closely with the Parks Department and obviously with our colleagues at NYPD. Park drives are an important piece of the bike network citywide in terms of where people have a safe place to bike. That in particular includes folks who are less skilled, newer bikers, children and more casual riders, who can often find more safety where there is no risk of cars. We have obviously looked at the potential situations both in the collisions that have been mentioned today in the parks as well as in the past on park drives, and worked closely with the Parks Department and NYPD to assess if interventions are needed to the design. Would my colleagues like to add anything else?

(04:03:09)

As I mentioned, the pilot program is currently scheduled to end on December 31, 2026. Can you please confirm whether that is still the plan?

(04:03:20)

I would have to defer to my colleagues at Parks. I am aware of the pilot program and I am aware of that date. I have to assume it is being actively looked at, but I honestly

(04:03:31)

cannot speak to that today. Are you aware whether extending the duration is on the table, or is there anything else the administration is considering with respect to those efforts?

(04:03:42)

Yeah, I cannot — that is not our... that is a Parks-related question. Yes. OK, complete.

(04:03:49)

Can you please administer the oath to our deputy chief? Right. OK. Can you please raise your right hand.

(04:04:12)

All right. My last set of questions are about our enforcement against retailers. According to previous statements from the Department of Consumer Protection, one issue the agency has encountered regarding enforcement against retailers is that Section 20 of the Administrative Code, which prohibits the sale and rental of uncertified e-bikes and batteries, is too forgiving. This is because when a business first violates such prohibition, the agency cannot actually issue a penalty, as Section 20-610 provides that the first violation carries a civil penalty of $0. Only after catching the business violating 20-610 a second time within two years of the first violation can it fine, and even then the fine is only $250. However, despite these issues, it appears the City's enforcement efforts continue to rely primarily on Section 20-610.

(04:05:14)

Can you explain the issues the agency has faced under Section 20-610 and whether it still feels that its penalty structure, and particularly the inability to fine a business for their first violation, makes it harder to achieve compliance?

(04:05:34)

I think it does, Chair. As a general matter, as a law enforcement agency, I believe strongly in the importance of deterrence. And when you get a first violation that does not deter the worst conduct. I will say that our enforcement is having results. We are seeing more compliance by businesses. A lot of these businesses quickly do come into compliance, and I want to recognize that maybe they were not aware of their legal obligations. But given the very serious issues the Council and our City are confronting around safety, I think we would be very open to a conversation about changing the first-time penalty structure for these laws.

(04:06:13)

Thank you. As you know, the penalty structure under Section 20-762, which contains the City's ban on the sale of motorized scooters, is much less lenient. If it finds a business to be in violation of the motorized scooter ban, a civil penalty of $1,000 must be imposed, which increases to $2,000 for any subsequent violation within one year. However, we see much fewer fines issued for violations of 20-762. This is surprising as it seems that most devices that would be illegal to sell under 20-610 would also be illegal to sell under 20-762.

(04:06:50)

Can you please explain why the agency continues to primarily charge businesses with violations of 20-610 despite its penalty structure issues, and does the agency have a policy to always assess whether a business could be charged with a violation of 20-762 when conducting investigations for violations of 20-610?

(04:07:10)

On the last part, Chair — yes. When we do an inspection of one of these businesses, either online or in person, we are going to look at violations across the board and issue summonses accordingly. We have issued 50 summonses against illegal motorized scooters over the last nine months of 2026. I think what that number does not capture, though, is the very large number of citations and confiscations that NYPD has issued, which is part of the administration's approach. So most of the enforcement, I would say, Chair, is on the street rather than at the point of sale.

(04:07:45)

So regarding 20-610, you are open to changing the penalty structure? We are, yes. And with respect to 20-762, our expectation is that we will see more enforcement on that statute for the sale of these devices, which we believe can also be equally captured under 20-610.

(04:08:12)

Let me respond in two parts, Chair. With respect to the change in penalty structure, I think we would be open to it. My understanding, though, is that Local Law 39 does set the first-time violation at $0. That was done by legislation, not by rule. So we would need to work with the Council in order to change that. With respect to motorized scooters...

(04:08:36)

I think our enforcement approach reflects the fact that when we do an inspection, we are looking for violations across the board. The fact that we have 50 summonses for motorized scooters versus a lot more for other violations suggests to me that most of the violations are not happening at the point of sale, and that most of the confiscations NYPD is engaging with are likely — and again I do not want to swear by this — likely from devices that people got from outside the City. But certainly we would be open to conversations with the Council about how to strengthen point-of-sale enforcement.

(04:09:06)

Yeah, let us have continued conversations on both sections — talking about what the penalty should be for the first offense and the amounts. That can be an active conversation, which would be greatly appreciated. When the agency charges a business for a micromobility-related violation, do you have a policy of returning to the business some period of time after the violation to see if they are in compliance? I understand that the agency says re-inspections will be happening, but I am just curious to learn more about that policy.

(04:09:36)

Yeah, absolutely. And this speaks to the escalation process I described earlier. If we see violations, we are absolutely going to issue summonses. We are going to do re-inspections. If we see recidivism, we will issue sealing orders, which we have done. With some of these sealing orders, we can pull back if the business then comes into compliance. But what you have seen in our most recent sweep, which was...

(04:10:01)

...this month — in September — we found 53 businesses not in compliance. 13 came into compliance. The other 40 we are going to be following up on. I would also share that — sorry, Majority Leader, that is fine, call me Carlos — when we encounter a business and we see a lot of Local Law 39 issues or conditions that reflect perhaps a fire safety issue, we will notify FDNY immediately, and they also have sealing authority under the newest amendments of Local Law 39. Relatedly, if we see a large amount of motorized scooters, while we are not able to confiscate, we will notify the NYPD of the presence of motorized scooters so they can confiscate. So again, that speaks to the coordination that has to happen between our agencies.

(04:10:45)

Thank you. And Chief, Commissioner — I just want to apologize, I cannot pronounce the name you put forward earlier. I am going to say all right. Council Member Sanchez, also followed by Hanif, and then we will switch over to public testimony.

(04:11:01)

I will try to make this brief. Thank you, Majority Leader. My question is for the NYPD. We are talking about pedestrian safety in a lot of ways today when we are talking about micromobility safety and regulating micromobility devices, and the Chair touched on issues within parks specifically. I know Parks is not before us, but I think one of the things that has not been talked about as much today is pedestrian safety within parks and the enforcement of micromobility devices where they do not belong — already in parks, the laws are already there, but enforcement is what we are relying upon.

I am bringing this up because in addition to the numerous recurring issues that we have in my district with micromobility devices in parks, we have a park with an outdoor track next to Fort Hamilton High School. If anybody is aware of this, it is Russell Petrosino Park — next to Russell Petrosino Park — and this is a place where children and families go to walk and run along this circular track. Micromobility devices are not permitted on the track. It is very clear, there is signage, but this is a recurring issue. Weeks ago, a child was actually hit and taken by ambulance to a hospital, hit by a micromobility device. So we have a persistent problem of a lack of enforcement on what is technically Parks grounds.

So my question to you is: when there is a recurring issue within parks, which admittedly Parks probably does not have the enforcement capacity to enforce, what does that pipeline look like to the precincts and to the NYPD so we can make sure that there is a regular enforcement presence somewhere like that?

(04:12:37)

This goes through the Patrol Services Bureau, so I am going to ask Chief Alps to address that.

(04:12:42)

Thank you for that question. We do give direction on how to do that type of enforcement. It is a very challenging situation in parks in that individuals sometimes do not stop when we try to stop them, and it is a very congested area — there are a lot of pedestrians and people enjoying the parks. So to do that type of enforcement inside a park is risky. What we like to do is do that type of enforcement on the outskirts, to address those unregistered mobile vehicles on the outskirts so they do not make their way into a park. But there are times that we do go into the park, and we like to do it when the vehicle is stopped.

For instance, Central Park is a challenging environment to do that type of enforcement. For the most part, officers step out, they stop any bike or bicyclist — in some cases if they are operating in the wrong direction of travel or operating on a pedestrian path. The conversation starts and they ask them why they are stopped. Their body-worn cameras are activated, and everything is being recorded audio and video. They ask them, "Do you understand why you are being stopped?" And they do understand why they are being stopped, and we do enforcement when it is necessary. So we are successful in addressing these behaviors inside the park.

(04:14:14)

Can I ask how that approach would change if the individuals on the bike were minors under the age of 18? We would not allow them to drive away with that bike because they cannot be operating it like that. But that is not what is happening, because the same group of young people continue to operate within that park. So we can follow up on the details. I was going...

(04:14:39)

...to say we would very much appreciate, following the hearing, following up with you in your office. Please.

(04:14:43)

I would just say we have spent a lot of time today talking about delivery workers and I understand that. But there is also an issue of youth using these devices that I think deserves its own discussion. But thanks for answering that question. I have one quick thank-you to give: while we are talking about pedestrians, last time you were here I bothered you about the 17th Avenue pedestrian bridge, which had seen no work for seven years, and you assured me there has been lots of progress on the bridge. So thank you so much for all of your work in making that possible. Thank you.

(04:15:17)

Thank you. CM Hanif, and then we will transition to public testimony.

(04:15:19)

Thank you, Leader, and thank you all for being here. What specific reforms or rulemaking are currently underway to improve street safety and working conditions for delivery workers?

(04:15:35)

Well, thank you, CM. I think the most important rule that we are implementing right now for street safety is our deactivation protections that the Council passed last year. As I have testified earlier and throughout this hearing, we are never going to have safety on New York City streets if our delivery workers feel they need to choose between their livelihood and their safety — if they feel, as Chair Brewer said, that the companies are imposing unrealistic delivery times on them such that they have to cut corners. We are committed to vigorous enforcement of the deactivation rules. And I should add, we are also committed to vigorous enforcement — as we saw with the lawsuit against DoorDash — of our minimum pay rate, which is going to ensure that delivery workers can earn decent pay without having to put their lives or the lives of other New Yorkers at risk. So as I have said throughout this hearing, I think it is a theme from this administration: street safety and worker rights are not in tension, they are complementary, and we are going to take a whole-of-government approach to making safer New York City streets a reality.

(04:16:37)

I appreciate that. And then...

(04:16:38)

So I think two main points. One is obviously the Vision Zero reimagined report, which across the board is looking to improve safety for all street users, including delivery workers. For delivery workers specifically, we launched the Sustainable Delivery Unit in the latter part of last year, and their whole mission is to address street safety challenges associated with on-demand delivery services and commercial cycling. They work to address the impacts of the on-demand delivery industry through collaborative, innovative approaches. What is that unit called? The Sustainable Delivery Unit. And that is within DOT? Yes. Who runs it? What is the frequency of meetings? Is there a report? I do not have a lot of time. Sure — the head of the unit right now is... I need to figure that out. Ortiz is on leave. It reports into the Commissioner's office, though, so it is very close to our leadership, enabling collaboration across the agency writ large. I will...

(04:17:39)

...follow up with some more questions about that unit. And then, how frequently...

(04:17:44)

...would you say delivery workers are interacting with officers, and what is prompting those encounters? If you could be brief. It is a very hard question to answer, right? Because when we are taking enforcement action — let us say a patrol officer sees someone on a bike or in a car driving recklessly, engaging in dangerous behavior — Chief Obey said there are certain traffic rules that we emphasize that go directly to safety...

(04:18:20)

...that entire interaction — the officer may not know if the person is a delivery worker or not. It does not know at times. The person may say something, or it may be clear or not. So in other words, enforcement action is not in any way tied...

(04:18:36)

...to that. And so that is not the kind of thing that we would really be quantifying in our data, if that makes sense.

(04:18:42)

And then just finally, what types of e-bikes are delivery workers typically using and how fast can they go? That is a question for you. Thank you.

(04:18:52)

Thank you. That question comes up. I do not know if we have that data right now in terms of the specific types of vehicles workers are using. That is also why the administration is looking for additional tools such as Int 0787-2026 and Int 1069-2026, that would help us understand specifically and receive data that would help us understand what vehicles the workers are using. Thank you.

(04:19:16)

This panel is hereby excused. We are taking a short three-minute break. Please keep it down in the chambers. Be here in three minutes. Thank you. Actually, please keep it down — we are starting right now. Thank you. Find your seats, guys. So if we can keep it down, those who are coming to testify, please find your seats.

So now we are going to open the hearing for public testimony. Please find your seats. Please find your seats. Make some room in the middle. Hey, guys, if we want to get through the public testimony — we are going to get kicked out of the chamber today because there is an event happening tonight. So we really have to go through this quickly. We may have to move to another room. So the more delays we have, the more issues there are going to be.

Okay, so now this hearing is open for public testimony. For members of the public: this is a formal government proceeding and decorum shall be observed at all times. As such, members of the public shall remain silent at all times. The witness table is reserved for people who wish to testify. No video recording or photography is allowed from the witness table. For other members of the public not present, audio or video recording of testimony may be submitted, but submit transcripts of such to the Sergeant at Arms for inclusion in the hearing record. If you wish to speak at today's hearing, please fill out an appearance card with the Sergeant at Arms and wait until you are recognized. When you are recognized, you have two minutes to speak on the oversight topic or legislation being heard today. Any additional written testimony you wish to submit for the record, please submit it to the Sergeant at Arms and also email written testimony to testimony at council within 72 hours of the hearing. Audio and video recordings will not be accepted. We will now call the first panel.

I would also like to add that we have more than 70 people testifying today, so I will be consistent on the two-minute cutoff. I just want you to know I will be very, very fair with it, but at two minutes I am going to ask that you end your remarks. Thank you.

(04:21:55)

So first: Sandy Sordido, Renee Baruch, Carey Michaels, Wendy Peace, Pamela Manasek. If you are all here, please come to the witness table. You may begin, and you can choose. Remember to press the button before you speak. Thank you.

(04:22:46)

My name is Renee Brooke. Although she is not here, I would thank the Speaker for this opportunity to be heard. In May 2023, I was run over by an e-bike. This was the result. The photographs you see were taken after surgery was performed, which closed several cuts on my face. The fractures had to heal on their own. I was hospitalized for a total of a week. I later had surgery to fix the damage to my cervical spine. I was told that it was a delivery worker, but of course I do not know the identity, and I only regained consciousness once I was in the ambulance.

We have no means of identifying the driver of any motorized bike. I was recently in Europe, with a huge bicycle culture where there was no infrastructure, just a painted line. There were bike racks at all the railroad stations and outside of buildings, but they all stopped for red lights and stop signs and they obeyed the traffic rules. Even as a casual observer, you know that it is not safe to cross a New York City street if you are in the crosswalk, if you have a green light, unless you first look both ways to make sure that something is not still coming at you. Thank God my vision remains intact. No enforcement of any traffic laws is taking place, and you must pass Priscilla's Law, Int 0078-2026, as soon as possible. Thank you for your testimony.

(04:24:54)

Hi. My name is Wendy Piece. I am also a victim of being hit by an e-bike while I was on my regular bike — a person going the wrong way — but I am not going to talk about myself. I am going to talk about Jeanne Cutler, and this is a statement from her family as she remains hospitalized.

On July 7, my sister Jeanne was jogging in Central Park as she did most days for the past ten years, and an e-bike going in the wrong direction, in the wrong lane, in the pedestrian lane in the park, hit her from behind. She never saw it coming. As Jeanne lay unconscious bleeding on the ground, this e-bike driver attempted to flee the scene, but some wonderful New Yorkers stayed until the cops arrived. Not that it mattered. Can you imagine that three months later, Jeanne would still be in the hospital, and the e-bike driver that ran her down was questioned briefly at the scene by the police and then let go? How is that even possible?

Jeanne has endured multiple surgeries to fix the damage this e-bike rider caused to her body, and most severely her brain, and she still has a long journey ahead. It is incredibly disheartening that nearly three months later, our family has still no meaningful support or accountability from the City. We are not asking for e-bikes to be banned. We are asking for reasonable laws that provide accountability when someone is seriously injured by one. Our family strongly supports Priscilla's Law. Priscilla's Law would require every bike and e-scooter in New York City to carry a license plate and registration. No other family should have to go through this heartbreak, and after three months we are still asking the same questions. When will there be accountability? The Parks Department also needs to account for this. We need no e-bikes in the parks. Thank you so much for your time and consideration. Thank you.

(04:26:58)

Hello, and thank you, Speaker Menin, for allowing me to tell my story on behalf of all victims of e-vehicle crashes. My name is Pamela Massie. I am its first victim. Four years ago in 2022, as I crossed the street legally with my husband, I was brutally hit head-on by an e-vehicle traveling illegally off a sidewalk and into the crosswalk. I suffered a severe traumatic brain injury, am partially paralyzed, and lost my career as a cellist. There was zero accountability for the man who hit me. He tried to flee, but my husband detained him. He got no summons. He was not given a breathalyzer or drug test. Instead, he was allowed

(04:27:42)

to walk away freely, as seen by witnesses getting a coffee and croissants, while I was taken away in an ambulance, paralyzed.

Priscilla's Law, Int 0078-2026, which requires license and registration through the use of red light cameras, was introduced three years ago, and yet it is not one of the Bills brought before the City Council today. We do not know why. Each of the 24 Bills that are on the list represents only small pieces of solutions, but none will solve the larger safety issues running rampant in the city we love, except Priscilla's Law. Priscilla, as you have already been told, passed away because she took one step out and got hit by a Citi Bike. Priscilla's Law addresses everything needed for real safety. Just license and registration — so simple. License anyone operating a motorized vehicle and hold the individual accountable for illegal, egregious behavior. I do not care what they do for a living. These are not bikes. These are silent motorcycles, and they are killers. You may as well just put a gun to my head. Thank you. Oh, by the way, I am still paralyzed. Thank you. And that is me.

(04:29:05)

Right. Thank you. We are now going to — this panel is excused. The next panel is Brooklyn Borough President Antonio Reynoso. So sorry.

(04:29:29)

Good afternoon, Chair. Good afternoon. I thought it was going to have more people in the panel, but it is all right. I am Antonio Reynoso. I am currently the President of the greatest borough in the City of New York, which is Brooklyn, and I am happy to be here. To those that do not agree, you are welcome.

This is a very serious day and I do not mean to open it up in jest, but this year about 149 people have died in crashes on New York City streets. Zero of those people have been killed by e-bikes or e-scooters. Generally, e-bikes and scooters and mopeds are responsible for 5% of pedestrian injuries and 5% of pedestrian fatalities. That means 95% of pedestrian injuries and fatalities are caused by cars. Yet here we are having a hearing with 21 Bills aimed at regulating e-bikes and scooters as well as mopeds, which are already illegal. None are about regulating dangerous driving and only two are about infrastructure. Meanwhile, important safety Bills like universal daylighting still have not been passed. When was the last time the City Council had a hearing with 21 Bills aimed at improving safety by curbing dangerous driving?

Some of the Bills being heard today will be helpful. We should focus on regulating businesses that sell e-bikes and companies that incentivize unsafe practices. But instead, too many of the Bills are allowing enforcement that will absolutely be carried out in a discriminatory way that punishes people of color and workers who are just trying to get around the city to do their jobs. Every major city that has tried to pass bike licensing Bills has either repealed it or decided not to try it in the first place, because it has failed so often. It is unwieldy, it is expensive, and it gives police another excuse to target people of color. The idea of getting police to report on targeted traffic enforcement is a joke, and half-stepping measures like writing "look up" on streets just blames pedestrians for getting themselves hit. What we need instead is to end car culture. The Council should support the administration in actually implementing the Streets Plan. Thank you, your time is up. Thank you.

(04:31:37)

Thank you. Thank you so much for your time. Please keep it down in the chambers. All right. Our next panel is Jonathan Cohen, Ben Furnas, Griff Schnitzler — my apologies — Andrew Bono, Mehdi and Dahlia Rohit.

(04:32:09)

Ben, will you begin? Good afternoon. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today and for calling today's hearing. My name is Ben Furnas and I am the Executive Director of Transportation Alternatives. We are here today because a 17-year-old boy died not a few weeks ago, just a block from where we are sitting. A boy was killed riding an illegal high-speed device. A terrible crash on the Queensboro Bridge path earlier this year left two New Yorkers dead. So far this year, 17 New Yorkers — some as old as 15 years, some as young as 15 years old — have been killed while riding bikes or illegal high-speed devices, so-called e-bikes. Almost everyone was killed by a car or a truck driver.

Like you, I hear a lot of complaints about devices that are just too fast for our bike lanes. As a person who rides a bike and a parent of a six-year-old bike rider — I am very proud of her — I feel it too. To be clear, pedal-assist and low-speed e-bikes are miraculous. They are important, helpful, safe mobility devices that enable countless New Yorkers to move around the city. But high-speed devices are illegal to ride in New York City, yet they are marketed and sold as legal to young people and New Yorkers. Many can travel at speeds exceeding 25 miles per hour, or as high as 50 or 60 miles per hour. This is too fast for dense urban environments like New York City, where 20 is plenty on our streets and in our bike lanes.

We need to get high-speed devices off our streets, help people transition to safe devices, and regulate the delivery companies that have transformed the conditions on our streets. I would like to highlight a few Bills in particular. CM Schulman's Int 0950-2026 and Committee Chair's Int 0244-2026 empower the City to revoke licenses of companies that pressure delivery workers to go too fast and analyze delivery trip data to establish rules. We should get high-speed devices off our streets by banning the sale of the fastest devices currently capable of exceeding 20 miles per hour. We should help New Yorkers transition away from unsafe devices to safe, slow ones by creating a trade-in program. We want a thoughtful transition to 20-miles-per-hour streets and bike lanes. Thank you. Thank you so much. We are honored to be part of this work. Appreciate it.

(04:34:16)

Thank you. My name is Jonathan Cohen, and together with my co-founder — also Jonathan Cohen, a bit confusing — we co-founded Joco, the best bike-share in the world, here in New York City. As Ben mentioned and many others have mentioned, there have been many people who have been killed and injured by trucks and cars. Just this week, unfortunately, a woman was actually just packing her bag and was hit by a truck on 34th Street. This was a kind of a really consistent reminder to us that infrastructure and safer streets protect cyclists from much larger vehicles.

I wanted to hone in on a few particular proposals that we really support from the Bills that were announced today. First, banning Class 3 bikes — 20 is plenty, as everyone has mentioned. I do not see why anyone should or would be against that. Second, the trade-in program is an amazing idea. People should be able to trade for compliant bikes or rentals towards safer bikes. Third, dynamometers — same thing, game changer. There are too many modified or Frankenstein bikes that are difficult to identify without the right testing equipment. Safe riding starts with safe bikes. Lastly, sidewalk detection — New York is the best city in the world. We would be happy to sit down with the relevant agencies and show them this proprietary sensor technology. We have already been working on it and are very excited to roll it out to our entire fleet. We think this could be a really important tool across the entire industry. With that, we are really excited to see the City continue to move in the right direction. From when we started the company five years ago to today, riding a bike is a million times easier, and I believe being a pedestrian is as well. So thank you so much. Thank you.

(04:36:08)

Good afternoon. My name is Aaliyah Sumo and I am the Deputy Director for New York City Policy at the New York League

(04:36:14)

of Conservation Voters, a statewide environmental organization. Thank you to the Chairs and Committee members for the opportunity to testify. I have submitted longer written comments, so I am going to focus on the high level today and why our organization continues to be a steadfast supporter of safe and legal mobility devices such as low-speed and pedal-assist cargo bikes and scooters. This helps us to reduce the amount of fossil fuel-based cars on our streets, which can decrease greenhouse gas emissions, air pollution and vehicle congestion. These devices offer a more affordable and accessible mode of transportation, and it helps a large portion of the city who live in transit deserts access where they need to go. It also helps a lot of residents with their employment. We are saddened by the cyclist deaths and injuries, and we support equitable policy solutions to ensure that all New Yorkers are safe.

(04:37:05)

While our city has made a lot of strides on street improvements, there are still many dangerous, illegal and high-speed devices out there, and their proliferation is a serious concern whether you are a driver, pedestrian or cyclist.

(04:37:19)

We are pleased that the administration has released its zero-emission plan, and we want to underscore that for this to be successfully implemented, we need to allocate the right capital and expense funding for safety improvements and staffing, and ultimately to improve safety for all residents. We strongly support a multi-pronged approach such as improving street safety, education and street infrastructure, requiring more accountability from app-based companies, stopping businesses that sell illegally or falsely advertise high-speed devices, and developing a phased approach to remove illegal and uncertified high-speed devices. My written comments go into a lot more depth, but there are a few Bills that we support that I just want to quickly highlight. We support Int 0244-2026. We strongly recommend that

(04:38:09)

— thank you, Aaliyah. Can you submit written testimony? We will make sure to read it. I do not have any questions, but I believe my colleague does.

(04:38:17)

Yeah, quick question for Joco — Johnny — just on this tracking that you have for sidewalks. We have seen a lot of bikes go through red lights, go the wrong way down a one-way street. That tracking technology you have, is it available for that as well? Absolutely, and we would love to apply it to anything — going the wrong way down the street, going against traffic, going through red lights. That is the goal.

(04:38:40)

All of our vehicles are only Class one, and we think it should be applied across the board to everybody. And so what are you doing now if these issues are brought to your attention around, you know, obviously we talk about safety, making sure people are following the rules of the road — people on your bikes, you guys own them and you are renting them out. Yeah. So if someone brings it to our attention, if they do not bring it to the delivery company that the person is working for, we right away give the person a significant warning. And if they get a couple of strikes — two strikes — they are basically banned from the service. I have to check if it is two or three, I want to double-check that, but we have a zero-tolerance policy for, you know...

(04:39:24)

And then does the public at large know that this is the Joco policy, or is it something available on your website? Yes, it is available on our website, available to all riders. And the last question just

(04:39:33)

around training for riders — what kind of training are you ensuring that, you know, people understand? I know you give helmets, and yes, so we give free helmets

(04:39:39)

to all riders. We require that you fill out and take an entire training course. We also require that you take the training course and we are constantly updating these kinds of requirements. We are very supportive of the right training. And so if the public had concerns, how would they reach out to Joco about that? Sure — support at joco.com, or you can contact me directly. I am happy to answer. Thank you. Thank you.

(04:40:05)

Thank you. Thank you. This panel is excused. On the next panel we have Evan Masoudi, Robert Polkinsky, Mary Lou Elan, Harvey Goldberg and Rose Achy. My apologies if I am mispronouncing your names.

(04:40:43)

While you are getting settled, I have a few more names to join you — just Andrew Fine, Thomas Lowy and Carol Wilson. Go ahead. Yeah, you begin.

(04:41:40)

Janet, you begin. Right. Hello, I am Janet Schroeder, Director of... But what about the tens of thousands of pedestrians and cyclists who have been hit by vehicles in the last six years? We ask you to stop deflecting from the e-vehicle violence on pedestrians and cyclists to talk about cars. This is a crisis, a health crisis. Accountability for bike riders does not make cars more dangerous, but it will change rider behavior and therefore will save lives and lessen injuries of vehicle riders, pedestrians and cyclists.

DOT and NYPD stats for e-vehicle injuries are gravely inaccurate. Public Advocate, your stats are dead wrong about the 147 seriously named victims. Eight tabs of police reports — police usually arrive after the ambulance takes away the victim, and if police are there, they often do not report, citing "rider fled," "I did not witness it." Dr. Angela Faith at Bellevue: over 300 admissions caused in the last year. This is one of 54 hospitals in New York City. The Council must start pulling and using all ER injury stats.

Bike lanes do not keep a rider from speeding, running lights or leaving the scene of an accident. In all but six of the 147 crashes, the rider fled. Some of the bills we like — thank you for this hearing. Yes to the geofencing bill. Int 0090 is great if it takes the bike down to zero miles per hour so that bikes cannot ride on the sidewalk. But then how will Lincoln Restler and Chi Ossé get around the city? Res 0044, calling on New York State legislators to increase penalties for e-vehicles leaving the scene of the crash, only works if all riders can be identified by registered plate, and that is the intro related to Priscilla's Law. Shaun, you asked how to tell the difference between legal and illegal. How about a license plate for the legal ones? We are asking for a resolution for the City Council to state legislators to pass Priscilla's Law. Thank you.

(04:43:46)

Thank you. Next up. Thank you.

(04:43:54)

Thank you, Chair. I just want to take a moment ahead of my testimony here to register the outrage that I actually found common ground with Transportation Alternatives today. We are all ticked off that it takes four and a half hours to get the public's input on this important legislation on street safety. Thank you very much. Please keep it down. I would like to thank the three City Council Members who managed to actually stick around to listen to the public. I think it is outrageous that we do not have a full panel here when we have all survived half a day.

I want to thank Speaker Menin for bringing attention to this important public safety issue and holding this historic hearing. The body count on our streets continues to rise unabated and it must stop with this City Council. This includes e-bike riders, 17 of which are dead this year so far, and that is an old count — pedestrians throughout New York City and Central Park and Citi Bike riders, including the heartbreaking death of a 15-year-old doubled up on a Citi Bike on East Fourteenth Street just this month.

As a parent of three — two former teenage girls and one still teenage girl — this scares the living, you know what, out of me. I want to say that the bike lobby, which is heavily funded by Uber, DoorDash and Lyft — we see many of them today. They might wear t-shirts and might be bearded, they might play the

(04:45:30)

role of activists, but at the end of the day, I would love to ask them: are they paid for their appearance today? Are they drawing a salary? I can tell you one thing — the New York City Vehicle Safety Alliance is pure grassroots, all volunteer. We would love the City Council to take this more seriously. Pass licensing and registration because, as Janet just said, that is the way to actually tell legal from illegal. Thank you. Thank you for your

(04:45:59)

testimony. Next. This is on.

(04:46:02)

Okay. Thank you. I would like to thank both Speaker Menin and Chair Eric Dinowitz of the Committee. My name is Robert Paul Kinski. I am a 67-year-old resident of Fourteenth Street. Last year I was struck by a large, fat-tired e-bike — not one of those cute little ones you showed pictures of before, but much bigger — over in Hudson River Park. I had been running and was about to begin my trip home. Leaving the park, however, requires that you cross West Street, a major thoroughfare. As I approached the crosswalk on a path in West Street, the walk sign was illuminated in my favor, so I headed on my way. The only problem is that getting there requires crossing a two-way bike path. Despite signs telling cyclists to yield to pedestrians at the location, the rider did not yield nor attempt to slow down. Instead, there was a collective gasp as my right side and his front wheel collided. At the moment of impact I felt like my heart stopped and I was gone. If I had hit my head, there would have been one more obituary written.

(04:47:05)

Twenty hours — first in an ER, later in a trauma center — revealed emergency injuries including a broken arm, three broken ribs, a broken leg and internal bleeding. Recovery included surgery, months of therapy and trauma for both me and my family. The e-bike operator in my case had stayed at the scene and I am told was given a summons, I think for failing to yield, although e-bikes are also not allowed in that park. I was able to obtain a copy of the police report from the precinct and the name and address of the offender. I attempted to serve the offender with a notice of claim, but the letter was returned undeliverable — no forwarding address. There ended any chance I had of recovering even a portion of the expenses incurred.

Are you aware that the current police reporting procedures do not differentiate between a pedal bike and an e-bike? The machine that hit me was essentially an electric motorcycle, not a bicycle. We register and insure motorcycles and Teslas, but not e-bikes. This makes no sense. Thank you very

(04:48:05)

much for your testimony. Remind me of your name for the record.

(04:48:09)

Robert Olshansky... L. Paul Kinsky. Thank you so much, and

(04:48:12)

this is a reminder to please state your name before you speak. Next. Hi, my name is

(04:48:20)

Carol Wilson.

(04:48:20)

I have been hit, knocked down and injured by a bike in New York not once but twice. Both times the rider disregarded the basic rules of the road and went through a red light. Both times the rider was not in the clearly marked bike lane. Both times I was crossing the street in the designated pedestrian walkway with the walk signal. But this did not protect me.

The first time, a woman was on a Citi Bike. I was knocked down, passed out, woke up and dragged myself to the curb. She fled the scene. I called the ambulance myself and was diagnosed with a skull fracture. This could have been deadly as I was on a blood thinner. After three and a half years, I am still going to rehab to retrain my eyes to work with my brain.

The second time I was hit, knocked down and again hit my head on the pavement. I had a concussion and an injured leg muscle. I am glad the City is finally focusing on the dangers of vehicles on our streets, on our sidewalks and in our parks. However, I must say that several of the bills you are now considering will accomplish nothing to change or punish the rider behavior. Why? Because there is no way to identify the people who run the red light and hit a person or leave the scene. The common sense remedy is the intro related to Priscilla's Law, which requires a license plate so that that person can be identified and held responsible for their actions.

(04:50:13)

Thank you for the opportunity for me to tell my story. Thank you. Next. Okay. Thank you for

(04:50:18)

giving me this opportunity today. My name is Patty Myers. I am a New York City resident and have lived in Manhattan for 21 years. I strongly support Int 0802, known as Priscilla's Law, because New York City needs clear accountability for bikes and other electric vehicles to better protect pedestrians.

On September 19, 2024, I was entering a taxi when an e-bike struck me with significant force and knocked me to the ground. The rider did not stop, although traffic camera footage captured the incident and the police did come to my home. There was no license plate, registration or other means to identify the rider and hold them accountable. Had I been struck by a car, the driver would have faced serious consequences and would have been found from their license plate. Because this was an e-bike, the rider was able to leave without accountability or responsibility.

I was rushed to the emergency room. I stayed there until three in the morning and then was transferred to an orthopedic hospital for emergency hip surgery. I had a fractured hip. It took many, many months for me to recover. I was on a walker, then I was on a cane, and

(04:51:35)

in May 2025, I underwent a second surgery because the first procedure did not do what it needed to do. I see I am running out of time. Even now, when I walk through the streets, I am nervous. It is not the same. I moved here from the suburbs especially to be able to walk around, have that freedom and excitement, and now it has been taken away from

(04:52:00)

me. I am nervous. I am scared. I am always looking around. So in conclusion, please take into consideration Priscilla's Law. It would really make a difference. We do not want to have more people harmed and hurt. Thank you.

(04:52:14)

Thank you for your time. Thank you for your testimony. Next.

(04:52:22)

Is this on? Well, I consider myself lucky right after hearing the previous testimony. This is what I looked like after I was hit by a bike. I am a lifelong New Yorker. I was badly hurt by an e-bike in Riverside Park on the bike lane, even though the bike lane was marked in those days as prohibited for e-bikes. It was rampant with them. A rider hit me from behind and knocked me down, broke my clavicle, a couple of ribs and, of course, these horrible bruises.

I believe that New York and indeed America developed a system in response to auto accidents at the beginning of the twentieth century. Insurance companies in cooperation with the states made mandatory insurance ubiquitous. There is no reason not to extend the automobile and truck rules to e-bikes and delivery vans. The cost is enormous. The hospital charges, if I did not have insurance, would have been devastating, and I am sure for many people they are devastated without insurance. We cannot go on this way. That is what I

(04:53:42)

have to say. Thank you. This panel is excused. The next panel we have: we have Herms, Gustavo, Archie... Jeanne Bald — my apologies if I mispronounce your name — and Mohammed... So we have Lydia, Gustavo, Salon... Oh, you are here. Okay, great. And Mohammed, and we will begin from my right to your left. Please state your name for the record. You begin when you are ready.

(04:54:27)

Hi. Thank you so much. I am Herms. I am the Deputy Director at the Workers Justice Project. We organize and advocate for the more than 70,000 delivery workers on the streets of New York City. I am here today to testify about Int 0244 and Int 0031. The proposed legislation to ban the sale and use of Class 3 e-bikes, along with a trade-in program — Workers Justice Project strongly supports the overall goal of the bills before the Council today: removing unsafe

(04:54:52)

and illegal devices from our streets, slowing down the top speeds of illegal e-bikes, and holding apps accountable. We estimate that tens of thousands of workers currently use illegal Class 3 devices, and banning their use without a feasible trade-in program will leave these workers without a legal device that they can use to make a living. Getting Class 3 devices off the streets will require a well-planned, fully funded program to enable delivery workers and other Class 3 owners to safely and affordably transition to new devices. We do not believe the trade-in program legislation currently before the Council can feasibly accomplish this.

Last year we partnered with DOT on the e-bike trade-in program targeting unsafe batteries. The $2 million program traded in a total of 400 bikes at an approximate cost of $5,000 per bike. To trade in up to 20,000 Class 3 bikes would cost the City a hundred million dollars, assuming it is even feasible to source that many e-bikes and convince delivery workers to switch from their trusted bikes to new ones. We faced a lot of skepticism.

Our proposed alternative is for the Council to fund a transition program that would alter the motors of existing legal Class 3 bikes so they could not go faster than 20 miles per hour, and provide speedometers to delivery workers so they know how fast they are going. This would cost a fraction of the cost of a full bike trade-in program and would allow delivery workers to keep their trusted bikes they know can withstand the rigors of a 12-hour delivery shift. It would also enable the City to fund small businesses and bike shops to provide these alterations. Instead of banning the tools that delivery workers depend on to work, we should focus on the underlying goal: reducing bike speeds. Thank

(04:56:29)

you. Thank you very much,

(04:56:33)

Leah. Thank you. All right, thank you. My name is Leah... I am the Executive Director of the Workers Justice Project. First let me start by making it clear that we strongly support the goal of making our streets safer, making New Yorkers transition to safe, legal micro-mobility devices and making delivery work safe. We understand the urgency because it is delivery workers who are losing their lives. Just this week a delivery worker died in Midtown. Yesterday I actually brought copies of a recent report for each Council Member, which will also be submitted online. This report highlights that 53% of delivery workers reported a work-related injury — nearly twice the rate of the 2022 report. We are submitting copies here in the package.

The reason I am here is because the current package of bills — I think it is 20 or 24 now being heard today — does not address the root causes of street safety. It leaves out the need for safe street infrastructure, stronger worker protections, a real transition plan and real accountability for corporations. We are ready to work with you to add the missing pieces to this puzzle.

NYPD is already conducting increased e-bike enforcement and we completely oppose Int 2361, Int 2587 and Int 0986 because we feel that these bills are intended to intensify NYPD enforcement. We cannot put workers' livelihoods in the hands of delivery corporations. We should not deploy... we should actually look at investing in a transition plan, holding corporations accountable, expanding worker protections. On pages 9 and 10 we will tell you the exact reason why multibillion-dollar corporations are exercising enormous pressure.

(04:58:36)

Thank you for workers. Gustavo. Good afternoon. My name is Gustavo. I am a member-leader of Workers Justice Project and I am a delivery worker. I am using the apps for about ten years and I am here today to share my concern about the package of bills. I understand that the goal is to make the streets safer for everyone, but there are some concerns about some of the bills. So I come to express my concern and my opposition to Int 2361, Int 2587 and Int 0986. These bills will give the power to NYPD to make things more difficult for delivery workers. I think we have to address this and that is why I am here today — to ask you to listen to us and address this situation in a good way, not come against delivery workers again.

So this is what I see: one of the bills is going to fine workers with a $2,000 ticket and confiscate their tools to work. So this is not right. This has to be addressed in different ways. My speech is longer but I am not going to read everything. I appreciate it. This is something that we have to address and we are here, open to sit and discuss in a better way and find the best solution for all delivery workers. We are 70,000 delivery workers who use the bike to survive, to keep feeding our families. Thank you.

(05:00:26)

Good afternoon. My name is Souleymane D. I have been an app delivery worker for almost three years and I am also an organizer for Workers Justice Project. I am here today to speak against Int 2361, Int 2587, Int 0986 and other bills that would increase punishment against delivery workers.

I work mainly in Lower Manhattan alongside more than 200 delivery workers from West Africa. We work hard every day delivering food, medicine and other essential goods for New Yorkers. Recently we heard about the Mayor's planned sweep and possible bike confiscation on October 8. This is very frightening for workers who depend on our bikes to make our living. Many delivery workers have nowhere safe to park their bikes or rest. We are often forced to park wherever we can and eat on the street.

We understand that city safety is important, but delivery workers are not the problem. We want to be a part of the solution. Instead of more punishment, we need safer bike lanes, lower speeds, secure bike parking, more protective bike lanes, more delivery hubs where workers can rest and eat. We also need the City to regulate delivery apps so they do not pressure workers to accept multiple deliveries at once or rush through the streets. Workers should also be protected when we choose safety over speed. We are asking the City to listen to delivery workers and bring us to the table. We know the difference between safe and not illegal. We need safety, not punishment.

(05:02:09)

Thank you. Next. Good afternoon, Council members. My name is Mohammed Riyadh. I am a worker and delivery worker in New York City. I have been working in New York City for almost three years and I am an organizer and leader at the Workers' Justice Project. I am here to share my concern about Int 0986-2026, Int 0787-2026 and Int 0988-2026. While those bills are processed as safety measures, delivery workers are concerned those could result in more tickets and greater pressure from delivery worker platforms on workers. Workers already face significant risks from unrealistic delivery deadlines. I experienced this pressure myself last week when I worked through gravel in the rain. I was given multiple orders with the same delivery deadlines, making it physically impossible to meet all of them safely. As a result, my own performance rating was penalized and I was unable to work for the next two weeks.

If the Council members want to take some action on safety for delivery workers, we need more protections. Delivery platforms must be held responsible for setting time frames that do not encourage unsafe riding. We also need more parking areas for bicycles, stronger protections against deactivation, meaningful input from delivery workers on safety policies, and safe policies for double-ups. We all want safe working conditions.

(05:03:57)

Delivery workers want to do our jobs, support our families and return home safely. I respectfully ask the Council to listen to delivery workers and include our voices in decisions that affect our safety and livelihoods. Thank you for your time.

(05:04:16)

Thanks so much. Before he goes, I just want to — sorry if you spoke out of order, but...

(05:04:19)

You spoke out of order. You spoke out of order. I do have questions for you, though.

(05:04:26)

Yeah. Do you support any enforcement whatsoever? Of course, we support some level of enforcement. Actually, you have a line of tickets here — actually, this is for one worker. A worker spends around $4,000 to $5,000 every two months just on tickets and fines every single day they deliver. Not only that, on top of that, most of them actually have to replace their own device every time it is confiscated, which costs anything between $3,000 and $4,000. NYPD is already doing a massive amount of enforcement on delivery workers. The problem is not enforcement. The problem is the lack of infrastructure on our streets. We have an algorithm that is exercising an enormous amount of pressure. Actually, on pages 9 and 10, we will tell you how much the apps actually control — they control the routes workers take, where they move, how they move, how many deliveries they have to complete and the amount of time they have to complete each delivery. That is the actual...

(05:05:25)

...part of the problem. So we have bills that tackle the regulation — that is CM Schulman's bill on licensing — which hopefully will not do too much harm.

(05:05:36)

And so we will try to make those bills stronger. But what street enforcement is acceptable? The street enforcement that...

(05:05:45)

...is already happening on this.

(05:05:46)

No, no, I am asking — what street enforcement is acceptable?

(05:05:50)

Well, we are talking about 70,000 delivery workers who are already receiving a stream of enforcement, which is civil summonses every day. I am simply asking, is there an enforcement role that you would be okay with?

(05:06:04)

It is already happening. I am trying to understand what other enforcement you are requiring when you have NYPD...

(05:06:13)

...parking on a corner just to give civil summonses, and when they are already doing bike confiscation — that is already the reality. Understood. Are you asking if you want them to go to...

(05:06:24)

...jail? Is that what you are asking? That is a straw man argument. But what I will say is this: NYPD testified today that they are not going to be outsourcing their enforcement. They also testified that they do not want to be enforcing street safety laws. So, given that the enforcement is already here and they are not outsourcing it, speedometers would actually be helpful for your workers to keep their devices from being confiscated by NYPD. Speed awareness would also be helpful so that workers can know how fast they are going. I think we are moving toward addressing the ways that apps perversely incentivize workers to have to...

(05:07:05)

...ride unsafely. We are trying to really reduce the need for enforcement. I do not think we have a problem with enforcing the legal speed limits and things like that, but we also need on the other side to regulate the algorithm. I agree with that. I think we need to do more on clean infrastructure. I think we need to expand the network so that your workers are actually not having to be on sidewalks and not having to be sharing the road with cars. I am with you on that. The other thing I...

(05:07:31)

...wanted to ask before I turn over to CM Hanif...

(05:07:34)

...and Brewer is: the administration testified that there is pending legislation at the state level that would classify anything over 20 miles per hour as basically a motorcycle, and that would require registration the same way that we do for mopeds. Is that something you would support as an alternative to an outright ban?

So we strongly support reducing the speed of the bikes — that is something that we have worked on very closely with the previous administration. We have made a commitment to this administration that reducing the speed should be the right track. That is why we are thinking about how to figure out a system to reduce the speed of these bikes, rather than making them illegal or putting cops to chase workers to identify whether they are legal or not. We would strongly support figuring out how we can create a system to reduce the speed. We have concerns, obviously, with registration for a couple of reasons. One is the operating cost that it takes, navigating a complicated bureaucracy where many delivery workers — immigrant workers or workers in general — have to navigate. And then there is the question of where the ownership and the responsibility of the delivery...

(05:08:43)

...companies lies. Thank you. CM Hanif, followed by...

(05:08:49)

...Brewer. Thank you. Thank you for testifying. Could you share what changes delivery companies should be required to make that you are talking about, so that workers can ride safely? You shared with us all in...

(05:09:04)

...pages 9 and 10. Well, actually, I want to highlight something important for people in the public to understand, particularly on delivery companies. We have multi-billion dollar corporations who are making work-related decisions for delivery workers. They are choosing which routes delivery workers take, the order completion speed of delivery workers, the number of hours they work, the number of deliveries they have to accept within an hour, and the amount of hours and days they work on the street. On top of that, they are consistently threatening workers — if a worker does not meet the required intensity that they are required to work at, workers likely face deactivation. Actually, deactivation is the driving fear that forces workers to make unnecessary choices, which puts their own safety at risk.

To answer your question: delivery workers do not have deactivation protections right now, which means they do not have the tools to fight back against the ongoing pressure that these apps are exercising on workers. Int 1332, which we passed last year, was watered down to please the corporations. The bill only protects workers who are permanently deactivated. So now we have Uber, Grubhub and DoorDash moving to a new model of deactivation, which is temporary — locking out workers, restricting scheduling and reducing work hours and the number of deliveries. We actually have about 4,000 workers who have come to our office having been unfairly deactivated.

We need to regulate the algorithms. We need to actually expand not just cause protections, but actually look at how these algorithms work. The City found out that DoorDash was stealing more than a hundred million dollars from workers and they had to admit it. We want to know what is going on behind the algorithm. Yes, we strongly support legislation collecting the data — except the personal data of the worker — but let us find out how they are using the algorithm to profit and put not just worker safety but every New Yorker's safety on the line. So then on the issue of speeding, adding speedometers — or whatever they are — I mean, that will not change anything unless you stop the corporations and the apps from being able to pressure workers to ride faster. They have to deliver within that time frame. That longer-term strategy is what I want to make sure we are really aligned on here. And I think the reality is that many delivery workers have to make unnecessary choices to keep their jobs, and they are the ones who are dying at the...

(05:11:50)

...highest rate. Thank you. CM Brewer, it was already asked. I am concerned about the algorithms and that is what we have to work on. Thank...

(05:11:56)

...you. Thank you. This panel...

(05:11:59)

...is excused. We thank you so much for testifying. Really, really appreciate it.

(05:12:03)

Council members — sorry, not Council members, it has been a long day. The next panel will be Abigail Jackson on Zoom, Erica Sofa or Sophia, Ben Rosen and Michael Sutherland. Please come on up.

(05:12:59)

Yeah, they are here. Beginning with you — please state your name for the record.

(05:13:05)

Good afternoon. Thank you to the chairs for holding this hearing. My name is Michael Sutherland. I am the Senior Policy and Legislative Analyst at Open Plans, an advocacy organization fighting for a more livable city. At Open Plans, we believe that our streets should work for all users, ensuring New Yorkers have access to safe, legal micromobility devices — a vital part of our city's mobility. Micromobility provides an alternative to car trips, which is especially important in the outer boroughs like southern Brooklyn, where I was born and raised.

At Open Plans, we believe three pillars make up effective micromobility policy: point-of-sale regulation, enforcement and infrastructure. We support Int 0950-2026 and Int 0986-2026 to address dangerous devices at the point of sale. We have serious concerns about Preconsidered Int 0244-2026, which would ban the sale and use of Class 3 bikes. We are supportive of a ban on the sale of Class 4 bikes, but a ban on use concerns us, as warnings issued through this bill could create an environment for pretextual stops, resulting in a disproportionate impact on undocumented New Yorkers. We are supportive of the concept of Int 0994-2026, though we have thoughts about the mechanisms of enforcement which we detail further in our written testimony, which we will submit. We support Int 1066-2026, which would add traffic calming measures to bike lanes.

However, we believe that infrastructure is otherwise sorely missing from the conversation at this hearing. We encourage the Council to explore ways we can make use of these bikes more safe and convenient, like wider or protected bike lanes and dedicated space for micromobility on our busiest micromobility corridors, as CM Krishnan was mentioning earlier. We support the concept of Int 0095-2026 — a training program is essential in getting certain devices off the streets without limiting New Yorkers' ability to get around. Lastly, we strongly discourage the Council from hyperfocusing on delivery workers as the primary issue with micromobility. This does a disservice to the delivery workers who provide an essential service to our city and to the task at hand of making our streets safer for all users. To this end, we oppose Res 0043-2026. Our positions on these bills and others in this hearing are expanded further in our written testimony. Thank you for your time.

Thank you. Next.

(05:15:03)

Hi. Thank you for having me. My name is Erica Sofa and I am the Vice President for Park Use and Stewardship at the Central Park Conservancy. We are the park's sole caretakers, responsible for all 843 acres of the world's most famous urban park. Central Park sees roughly 42 million visits a year — more than Disney World. Increasingly, what we hear from visitors is that people feel anxious in the park because of speeding bikes, e-bikes and a fast-growing fleet of micromobility devices moving with too much velocity and little regard for anyone else. There have been too many avoidable incidents and injuries, and we are grateful for the Council's commitment to do something about it.

Let me outline some goals that the Conservancy would support. First, zero tolerance for devices that do not belong in a park at all. Heavy-duty e-scooters, unicycles and unregistered mopeds routinely exceed 30 miles per hour and are already illegal citywide. The dynamic meters flagged in Int 0986-2026 could help officers do that. Second, real routine enforcement against speeding cyclists. Newer detection technology can help identify a speeding rider and alert an officer stationed farther down the route — a speed trap model adapted for bikes. We also believe the NYPD bike unit should be substantially increased, putting more officers on wheels to model good riding and intervene in real time. Third, better bike infrastructure on the streets around the park, including protected bike lanes on the transverses, which already support through traffic, giving it somewhere to go besides our interior drives and pedestrian paths. This would reduce pressure in a park designed for respite and peacefulness. Thank you.

Thank you. Next. Good morning.

(05:16:58)

My name is Josh Golden. I am testifying today on behalf of Uber. Uber supports regulations that make our streets safer for all New Yorkers, including delivery workers. But too often when traffic tragedies occur — even when they have nothing to do with third-party delivery — the response is to blame this workforce. Over the past six years, the Council has passed dozens of laws regulating delivery apps. Workers are paid by the minute, have access to battery trade-ins, free safety equipment, low-cost UL-certified e-bikes and required safety training. Uber has distributed more than 8,000 helmets and 37,000 safety vests over the past 12 months. App-based delivery workers represent only a piece of device traffic. Citi Bike users take more than a million trips each week, and it is found that 40% of restaurants use their own delivery workers. We need stronger enforcement of the laws already on the books, not simply more regulation of one segment of riders.

Let us be clear: none of these bills will work without enforcement. For example, it is still too easy to purchase and operate unregistered mopeds or devices that lack UL certification. I want to comment specifically on three of the bills before you today. On Int 0994-2026, we strongly oppose the proposed mandate, which we believe is disproportionate. Citi Bike has operated under a City contract for more than a decade without this type of third-party liability requirement, and the bill would require a worker riding a 60-pound bicycle to carry six times the liability coverage required of someone driving a 6,000-pound vehicle. On Int 0989-2026, workers are paid for their delivery time and Uber does not pay them more for riding faster or penalize them for taking longer. If other companies do this, rather than having a study and more data in perpetuity, just ban the practice. On the Preconsidered introduction on tracking workers, we agree with the underlying safety elements of this proposal. We are highly concerned that this legislation is overly prescriptive. Specifically, it risks taking away workers' ability to earn a living by relying on tracking technology that is frequently problematic in dense parts of New York City, where satellite signals bounce, drop and miscalculate speeds among high-rises. Thank you for your time and the opportunity to testify.

Thank you. Next.

(05:18:57)

Good afternoon. My name is Ben Rosen and I serve as the Director of Deployments at Pop Wheels, a Brooklyn-based company building battery swapping infrastructure across New York City. Since completing our successful 2024 pilot, Pop Wheels' 50-plus outdoor battery swapping cabinets have provided over half a million safe battery swaps to e-bike riders and workers while reducing the lithium-ion fire risk citywide. We support nearly all of the bills before you today, particularly those favoring low-speed Class one and Class two devices over heavier, higher-speed ones, and those removing illegal unregistered devices from our streets. But as the Council conducts this holistic review, we urge you not to lose sight of the lithium-ion battery fire crisis. Data released this year showed battery fires up more than 70% this year, on track for over 500 fires in 2026, including several recent tragic fatalities. The data highlights two things worth paying attention to. One...

(05:19:56)

An increasing share of these fires are non-structural, which means that they are occurring outside of charging context, igniting on the street after overuse, in a trash can, or through improper disposal. A growing number of these fires are caused by batteries reaching the end of their useful life cycle, even when a battery was UL 2271 certified at the point of sale. A UL 2271 certification says that the battery was safe on the day it was sold, but not that it was still safe after months of damage or charging cycles on City streets. The fix is simple: regular inspection, maintenance and safe retirement across the battery's full life cycle, available to every rider and not left to the rider alone. This could be done in-house by fleet operators, trained retailers, through a City-run assessment program, or through a third-party provider, of which battery swapping networks like ours are just one existing option. So we have three specific asks. The first is to amend Local Law 95 of 2025 to mandate ongoing battery life cycle management — the regular inspection, maintenance and timely... Thank you very much.

(05:20:59)

No problem. Next. Good afternoon, Majority Leader, CM Abreu, Chair Epstein and CM Louis, and Council Members Brewer and Hanif. I am here and I lead government relations in New York for Lime, the world's largest shared micro-mobility company and the largest operator in the City's e-scooter program, based out of eastern Queens and the Bronx. With dozens of bills before you, I want to draw one clear line: legal, high-speed devices are not the same as regulated shared scooters. Our scooters are capped at 15 miles per hour, and new riders are capped at 10 miles per hour for their first three rides. Geofencing keeps them out of sensitive areas and creates slow zones. Riders who break the rules face warnings, fines and suspensions, and UL-certified batteries are handled only by trained professionals. These safeguards show up in the safety records. A recent report found that more than 9 in 10 e-scooter collisions in New York happened outside of the shared scooter zone, and that shared fleet incident rates are comparable to cycling.

Our program is trusted and that is why it is growing. Bronx riders took more than one million Lime trips in 2025, and 41% of them started or ended near a subway station, showing their use. Queens ridership nearly doubled between 2024 and 2025 — 2,648,000 rides for all our operators. This program also delivers on our City's affordability goals. Through Lime Access, eligible low-income New Yorkers get a free 30-minute ride every day, and Access riders have made up as much as 13% of our ridership. Our Lime Prime subscription program offers longer scooter rides at the cost of a MetroCard swipe. That is why we are excited that the Visions Reimagined report commits to expanding e-scooters. Five years after Local Law 74 passed, service is still limited to two zones. We urge the Council to work with us on a near-term expansion plan with clear metrics for safety and equitable access. Finally, we share your goal of ending sidewalk riding. Lime began piloting sidewalk detection technology in the Bronx in 2023. We are open to partnering with Majority Leader Abreu and CM Epstein.

(05:23:08)

Oh, sorry. My apologies for that.

(05:23:08)

On Zoom we have Abigail Jackson. You may begin. Hello. My name is Abigail Jackson and I am the Transportation Associate at Regional Plan Association. We are a nonprofit research and advocacy organization that for more than a century has worked to shape the region's transportation future. We thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on today's agenda. One of the most important things we can do to accomplish our shared goals for street safety is to be consistent with the accurate definition of an e-bike in New York. An e-bike or high-speed bicycle with electric assist has a motor of less than 750 watts, working pedals and cannot exceed a maximum speed of 25 miles per hour. Many of the electric devices recently involved in traffic fatalities do not fit this definition and are more accurately described as e-mopeds or high-speed electric scooters. They are often confused with bikes or scooters. Conflating those currently illegal devices with bikes or scooters leads us to address perceived rather than actual street safety. And while the greatest threat to cyclists, pedestrians and other motorists — as many have said today — remains cars and trucks, faster, heavier devices like e-mopeds are presenting an increasing danger on our streets.

We have provided detailed written testimony covering each bill, but there are overarching goals that we would like the Council to consider. We should promote cycling, including high-speed bikes for people who choose them. We should eliminate e-mopeds or high-speed scooters from our streets and bike lanes. We should regulate third-party delivery services that encourage unsafe behavior and should not regulate their riders. Licensing or registering bikes is ineffective at promoting safety and reducing the use of e-mopeds. Rules and targets should avoid inequitable outcomes and have clear goals. And perhaps most importantly, we need to improve our street network and street design to support safe micro-mobility and take the onus for street safety off pedestrians and riders. We look forward to continuing to partner with the Council and agencies to make sure the final legislation will truly address street safety while preserving access to micro-mobility as an accessible and affordable option for New Yorkers. Thank you.

(05:25:08)

Thank you, CM Epstein. Thank you, Chair. For Uber, we have heard from the last panel just around routes and getting people from point A to point B, and drivers feeling, one, that their safety is at risk, and two, that they are being told to go down an illegal path. So I just wanted to hear — obviously that is concerning to hear and seeing that injuries are up to 50% of people who are in this industry — what do you say in

(05:25:43)

response to those claims that we just heard? I agree with you that it is concerning to hear that. I will say that we do not pay workers more for riding faster or penalize them for taking longer. I do believe that, from some of the workers that I talked to today and previously, others do that. And you know, I talked about CM Abreu's Bill Int 1069 — rather than just studying it and collecting data in perpetuity on those practices, we could be supportive of that.

(05:26:14)

So from your understanding, you are fully supportive of an outright ban on requiring people to go the wrong way down a one-way street — that illegal activity — and support the workers in their ability to have safe routes tracked? And so of that, just to ensure that we are on the same page: what are the outcomes that you would look forward to seeing if those behaviors were banned and people are not allowed to encourage riders to take unsafe routes? What is the future outcome that you would be looking to see happen?

(05:26:50)

Safer streets for New Yorkers. Yeah. So it sounds like we are on the same page. Sounds like you are on board with it. Thank you. I

(05:26:54)

have a question for you, for Uber.

(05:26:58)

Do you recognize the pressures you are putting on our workers? These are workers who in many ways, as discussed today, are incentivized to really move as fast as possible. For folks who have got to get the delivery done — do you believe that the company can play a role in reducing those safety impacts on our roads and making

(05:27:21)

their livelihoods better? I do believe we can play a role. I will say a couple of things. First, as I said to CM Abreu, we do not pay workers for riding faster. In fact, the opposite is true — the City requires us to pay per minute and we do not

(05:27:37)

penalize them for taking longer. But my understanding is there are some in the industry who do do that, and one thing you can do is ban that practice. I think we are under pressure internally to compete with other companies who do have on-time rates. I see a lot of heads shaking behind you, but we are under pressure. We are under pressure because other companies whose workers may be working for do have on-time rates and do penalize workers for not meeting certain expectations. We do not do that for two-wheeled workers who use two wheels here in New York City, but others do. So it would create a level playing field if you just outright ban that practice. I think a lot more needs to happen so that our workers are treated with dignity and respect. CM Brewer,

(05:28:20)

followed by CM Philip.

(05:28:21)

Thank you. You opened a can of worms. Thank you. But I was waiting for you. I know, I know it has been a very long time. So my question is: should the algorithms be the place to start in order to address and do what you suggest for the other competitors? How would you go about it? It has to be a law, I would assume, but again, getting it into effect would be different. How would you go about doing what you think we should

(05:28:47)

do? Yeah, I think — you know what to do in general, I often do not, Council Member — but Int 1069 is looking to collect a bunch of data and have the City do a study to then set a minimum amount of time that a worker can do a trip in, as my understanding of Int 1069 goes. Why not just ban the practice of setting a maximum amount of time and not have a minimum amount of time that a worker can do a trip in? And you think you can get your colleagues to go along with that?

(05:29:16)

Not that they have to. They have to if it is a law here. They are not.

(05:29:20)

Here. Okay, so I appreciate you being here. Thank you. You are welcome, Council Member.

(05:29:28)

Can you explain how Uber uses the app to find and enforce time-length fraud and how that policy is used against delivery workers?

(05:29:37)

Yeah, so we do look at unusual trips. An example that I can cite from last year is a worker who repeatedly went from Greenpoint to Prospect Heights via the Williamsburg Bridge and the Brooklyn Bridge. That was an unusual pattern that was extending the amount of trip time and extending pay time. There are cases of clear fraud and they should be demonstrable. Under Local Law 13 — the local law on deactivation protections — they would have to be clear examples of fraud, like that example of a worker who repeatedly goes across unnecessary bridges in order to extend the amount of time on our

(05:30:21)

tracking. And a worker who did that — did they have an opportunity to challenge that

(05:30:26)

deactivation? Yeah, so we installed — well, there is an opportunity to challenge that deactivation with an internal appeals panel, as well as through the workers' own hearing. The opposition, right — for sure — and the E for Justice Project also has an opportunity to challenge them directly with me. But the City, in passing the local law on deactivation review, also set up their own policies. And then — have you all designed a time-length minimum for delivery? No, we have not.

(05:30:56)

Is that something you all plan to do?

(05:30:59)

I feel that Int 1069, if it passes, the City would set up the minimum amount of time for us. What are

(05:31:04)

you guys thinking in terms of... just given that you all are

(05:31:09)

deactivating workers for unusual patterns of delivery time? So I would say to that: Int 1069 sets up a system where there would be a minimum amount of time, and we would utilize the City-set minimum amount of

(05:31:22)

time. Okay. And then right now, does the deactivation require workers to appeal?

(05:31:30)

That is right. Now, if there is demonstrated fraud, there is deactivation. But we do not set a delivery expectation or have an on-time rate for two-wheeled bike deliveries in New York, or for e-devices or anything on two wheels in New York. Got

(05:31:44)

it, got it. Thank you, Council Member. We will get to the bottom of that in the redlining process with the advocates who I think share vast disagreements with your positions today. Thank you. This panel is excused. Next up we have Ana Humphrey, Christopher Schiller, Jeanne Ryan, Michael Ring and Lloyd Fang. Please keep it down in the chambers. Thank you. To any of those bills' bands — all right. Remember to state your name for the record. You may begin. Please keep it down in the chambers, please, so you can hear our panelists.

(05:32:50)

Clearly. Thank you. Hello. My name is Anna Humphrey and I am testifying today on behalf of the Center for Independence of the Disabled, New York. We support Int 0950-2026 because establishing a business licensing framework for delivery services is a critical first step toward accountability. For disabled pedestrians, navigating City sidewalks has become increasingly hazardous due to reckless micro-mobility operation and unsafe commercial delivery practices. When reckless or illegal e-bike use leads to serious injuries, app-based delivery companies regularly shirk responsibility, leaving vulnerable victims with trauma and unrecoverable medical expenses. In 2023, three of those deaths involved bike riders, and most of those in 2023 were working for app-based delivery platforms. By setting clear conditions for licensure and establishing enforcement, Int 0950-2026 ensures that wealthy delivery platforms can finally be held equally, legally and financially accountable for the dangerous conditions created by their business models.

We support Int 0389-2026, which mandates that third-party food delivery apps verify that mopeds used by their workers are properly registered before allowing them onto the platform. Unregistered high-speed mopeds frequently travel illegally on sidewalks, pedestrian plazas and crosswalks, presenting a physical threat to pedestrians with disabilities who cannot react or move out of the way quickly. Without proper registration, hit-and-run incidents involving disabled New Yorkers leave victims with zero recourse or ability to identify those responsible. Int 0389-2026 places the burden directly on the corporations profiting from these deliveries, forcing platforms to ensure that every vehicle operating on their behalf follows basic traffic safety laws before hitting our streets. We urge the City Council to implement these safety measures that protect pedestrians with disabilities who want to navigate our streets without fear. Thank you for the opportunity to comment. Thank you. Next.

(05:34:50)

Good afternoon, Council Members. Thank you for the opportunity to give testimony today. My name is Christopher Schiller. I am Managing Attorney in the Disability Justice Program at New York Lawyers for the Public Interest. People with disabilities must be top of mind as the City develops its safety policies. Additionally, the City must include people with disabilities' stories in e-bike policies, including by providing meaningful access to adaptive bikes, which exist in a variety of different styles and can be used by people with disabilities who are unable to use conventional bikes, and by designing City infrastructure — including street and bike lane improvements — to account for adaptive bikes. I have three main points I would like to address. Community voice must be at the table, so people with disabilities and disability rights organizations and the Mayor's Office for People with Disabilities must be consulted as the City develops its infrastructure improvements

(05:36:06)

addressing people with disabilities' needs. Addressing those needs in the design phase, before policies are implemented, will keep more New Yorkers with disabilities safe, will ensure that the City is more accessible for all, and will avoid costly retrofits down the line. Second, data collection: the City must specifically collect data capturing people with disabilities when they are involved in collisions. Collecting such data will help identify the extent to which people with disabilities are disproportionately involved in such collisions and will help inform safety policies. To the extent that such data is not collected, the City should explore ways of doing so. And lastly, make bikes and infrastructure accessible by making sure that adaptive bikes are part of any City policies about e-bikes as well as infrastructure.

(05:37:05)

Thank you. Hi. My name is Michael Ring. If anyone needs a verbal description of my appearance, I am a 63-year-old white guy. I happen to be wearing a hoodie that says "Disabled in Action," as I am an officer of that organization. I am not speaking for them today.

Until about 12 years ago, I rode my bike for recreation, I rode it for commuting, I rode it as part of my job. I acquired my disability 12 and a half years ago. My cycling days are over, but I am really happy to live in a city where my 26-year-old twins do not have to have a driver's license. They still live in the city, they cycle to work, they cycle to school. I feel safe that they are cycling. I do not live in fear of being hit by a bicycle. I live in fear of my children being hit by a car. If people want to feel safer, they should stop looking at the headlines in the tabloids, which are catastrophizing bicycle accidents. Most people who are injured in the streets are hit by cars, and we need to do something about that.

When it comes to Uber and delivery apps, I use delivery apps a lot, and when I am hungry I stare at the screen and I see where the driver is. I can track where he has been and where he is going. It tells the driver how to get there, and they are being told to drive the wrong way on streets. I live in Park Slope, land of one-way streets. The shortcuts they are taking — they are being told to go the wrong way. Just order food and see how they travel.

I think we need to educate our citizens of New York City about safety, both pedestrians and cyclists, and we need to look out for each other. We do not need laws that are unenforceable and punitive. We need to know that people are going to be riding bikes, people are going to be walking, and we all need to get along a little better. I hope we can pass laws to make that happen.

(05:39:10)

Thank you. Next.

(05:39:12)

Good afternoon, committee chairs and members of the City Council. My name is Lloyd Thing and I am the Associate State Director of Advocacy for AARP New York. I am here testifying on behalf of our 750,000 members in New York City. AARP New York supports Int 0214-2026 and Int 0787-2026. Safe streets matter enormously to older adults who rely on walking and public transit to reach medical appointments, buy groceries and stay connected to their communities. For an older pedestrian, street design can determine whether crossing feels routine or dangerous. Crossing times, vehicle speeds, visibility and sidewalk conditions all matter. A 2022 study found that older adults, less than 15% of the City's population, accounted for more than 45% of pedestrian fatalities.

Int 0214-2026 takes the broad approach we have long supported through complete streets, designing for pedestrians, cyclists, transit riders, drivers and people using mobility devices. As the e-bike task force does its work, we ask that it explicitly consider the needs of older adults alongside those of people with disabilities, and examine where and why collisions happen so the City can make targeted infrastructure improvements. Int 0787-2026 addresses data and transparency. Reporting on targeted enforcement will show how resources are used and whether strategies actually reduce dangerous behavior, crashes and injuries. Enforcement should focus on behavior that endangers people and it should be judged on evidence. Both bills rest on the same principle: use data, thoughtful design and evidence to make our streets safer. AARP New York urges the Council to pass both bills that would bring us closer to making New York City a true age-friendly city. Thank you.

(05:41:00)

Thank you. Next. Hi, I am Gene...

(05:41:06)

Ryan, President of Disabled in Action of Metropolitan New York, or "DIA" for short. Like many people, some of us use delivery apps and services. Also, as people with disabilities, we are concerned about our safety when bikes are involved. We have close encounters with them at curb ramps, sidewalks and streets. On July 7th, while I was in my wheelchair crossing New York Avenue at 75th Street with the light and in the crosswalk, a biker came up from out of nowhere like a flash and hit my wheel at a very fast speed. He did not look like he was delivering anything. I was in shock. Luckily, I did not get hurt and my wheelchair still worked so I could get across the rest of the street to my accessible vehicle.

The rider and his e-bike went flying and he landed in the street. Naturally, we did not exchange insurance information. However, my wheelchair was not steering correctly and would unpredictably veer to the left. It turns out that the e-bike bent the steel fork on my wheelchair and I needed a new fork and two new casters for a total of $945 that I must pay. I have not been able to use my regular wheelchair as I still wait for the parts to arrive. They are supposed to come next week, three months after I was hit.

We are in favor of banning class three bikes. They go up to 28 miles per hour and probably beyond. We insist that all bikers follow the rules of the road and do not go over 20 miles per hour. We are also in favor of technology that makes bikes slow way down on sidewalks. Lastly, we need more education and accountability for e-bikes. Thank you.

(05:43:00)

Thank you so much for your testimony. This panel is excused. Next we have Katherine... Rosamund... Jonno... Kate Brockwell, Lenora... I do not want to mispronounce it, and Julian Williams, or Giuliani... Williams. Yeah, we will pull it out like in the cartoons. Please keep it down in the chambers. Thank you. And it is when I talk. Thank you. Please begin. Please keep the panel quiet and remember to turn on your mic and state your name for the record.

(05:44:16)

Thank you. Good afternoon, committee chairs and committee members. I am Winmore Errans, Chair of the Pedestrian and Bike Safety Committee of Good Neighbors of Park Slope. Good Neighbors, founded in 2015, has over 850 members. It is a nonprofit aging-in-place organization. Our social activism addresses our members' concerns. Our focus is to improve e-bike, bicycle and pedestrian safety by educating folks about the rules of the road. Our members report close calls with e-bikes riding on the sidewalk or against the flow of traffic, cutting close to pedestrians in crosswalks and running red lights. Close calls have become full collisions and serious injuries.

This year we partnered with our Council Member Shahana Hanif and released a public awareness campaign about the rules of the road. It consists of five highly visible traffic laws in English, Spanish and Bangla. We are sharing the campaign with other districts. Council Member Hudson and CM Restler intend to launch it as well. Our neighborhood campaign appeared on 31 LinkNYC kiosks, creating over 35,000 impressions per day. It ran and will run throughout, starting tomorrow. The cost was zero. We also handed out campaign fliers at community events and distributed posters to local bicycle and e-bike stores. We...

(05:45:52)

...would like to do more. Each of us, every community member, is vulnerable to serious injury on our streets. We seek a cultural change in the behavior of all those who share the road to normalize safety. We would like the Council to adopt the rules of the road campaign and go citywide in May 2027, which is New York City Bike Month. It would be great if this campaign was visible. Thank you very much for your time.

(05:46:27)

Thank you. Sergeant, can you please escort them out? Thank you very much. Thank you, Sergeant. My apologies for that. I take accountability for everything these days. You are next. Please go ahead.

(05:46:49)

Good afternoon, committee chairs and committee members. I am Kathy Group, a member of the Pedestrian and Bike Safety Committee of Good Neighbors of Park Slope. We strongly support legislation that requires delivery workers to have proper medical insurance and safety gear, that they complete and renew road safety training, that they observe lawful speed limits and that they get paid for safe operation. We support rules that require employers to provide liability insurance, an e-bike fleet that is registered and insured, and regulation requiring that bike vendors only sell legal vehicles.

We strongly support Int 1021-2026, the bike sharing safety enhancement legislation. Bike docking stations are visible throughout our public streets. This bike share legislation can be enhanced in three ways. It can require the rules of the road to be displayed on the ad space of the pay kiosk with large text at least one inch tall. It can require safety messaging to be highly visible and available in multiple languages. A rules of the road quiz should be administered and passed at least twice a year to unlock a bike.

Regarding Int 0985-2026 and Int 0986-2026, which require safety incident reporting by bike share operators: historically, data on crashes has been limited. Micro-mobility and last-mile delivery will only increase in the future. We recommend that better incident reporting also be required of delivery companies and the police. We support Int 0787-2026, requiring the NYPD to report its enforcement efforts. Obey red lights, ride with traffic and stay off the sidewalk. Visible rules of the road messaging can save lives. Help our rules of the road go citywide in Bike Month, May 2027. Thanks.

(05:48:49)

Hello. My name is Kate Brockwell and I am the co-chair of Families for Safe Streets in New York. I was in the crosswalk with the light, had stopped on the curb and looked both ways twice before starting to cross. The driver accelerated into me and 4,000 pounds of metal, glass, rubber and plastic drove into my left side. Ligaments in my wrist and forearms were torn as I hit the hood. The force of the vehicle colliding with my shin and knee caused the layers of bone, muscle, ligaments, fascia and nerves to tear apart horizontally. I envision a New York City where no one suffers like I have. Several of the bills being heard here today move us closer to that reality. Some do not. Today our streets are a chaotic mix of high-speed devices...

(05:49:28)

...that put all New Yorkers at risk, alongside safe, legal, low-speed bikes. We can get high-speed illegal devices off our streets while protecting the New Yorkers who choose to get around safely, including many of my fellow members.

(05:49:42)

We cannot allow deceptive and predatory advertising that convinces shoppers that high-speed illegal devices are safe and legal when they are not.

(05:49:50)

We are horrified that this safety hearing has not a single bill expanding safety infrastructure. Too many streets have narrow sidewalks, no bike lane and travel lanes filled with speeding traffic that turn neighborhood streets into deadly thoroughfares. We look forward to the day when three Council committees meet to discuss 23 bills aimed at reducing traffic violence as a whole.

(05:50:12)

We are grateful that the City Council is not moving forward with any plan to license and...

(05:50:16)

...register bikes. We have seen elsewhere that it is an administrative boondoggle. It does not work and it will not produce safety.

(05:50:23)

No one else should have to join Families for Safe Streets. Please help us get high-speed illegal devices off our streets and help us all get around safely by bike.

(05:50:32)

Thank you for your testimony. Next.

(05:50:39)

Good afternoon, Council. It is an honor to be here. My name is Julie Won and I am a member of Families for Safe Streets. In 2016, my beautiful, incredible daughter Jimmy... and myself, we were allied health care students. In 2016, on June 30th, at the tender age of 21, she was killed by a speeding driver while simply standing on the sidewalk when this driver jumped the curb and struck her, stealing her life and causing our family pain we will feel for the rest of our lives. Safe streets mean everything to me.

I am asking the City Council to remove illegal high-speed devices from our streets by banning them at the point of sale and to move forward with ending the sale of the fastest class three e-bikes. E-bikes are safe when they are legal and slow, but high-speed illegal devices are dangerous and they have no place on our streets. This legislation, coupled with continuing to build safe streets infrastructure that protects everyone from death or serious injury, will make our streets safe and prevent our families from suffering what my family does every day. Thank you.

(05:52:47)

Council Member Hanif has a question. Thank you. I just wanted to express my gratitude to Good Neighbors of Park Slope, Kathy and Lenore, for being here since 10:08 a.m. and waiting. I know that this is a lot of waiting, but I wanted to make sure that your voices are heard. It really means a lot to have your engagement, and this engagement that you have had with my office has been since the very beginning of my term in 2022. I wanted to ask: could you talk a little bit more about what you have been hearing from neighbors around e-bike and micro-mobility safety, and what led you all to organize around this issue specifically? You all are spending a lot of time on this.

(05:53:31)

Well, we just hear it from everyone. When we are out in the street at a public event, people all say, "Oh yeah, I was almost hit by a bike once." It is the unexpected behavior of going against traffic — you are not looking for them properly. I mean, as New Yorkers we are pretty hyper-alert all the time, but if we cannot hear them coming — which we cannot, because e-bikes are quiet — and our hearing is not so great...

(05:53:58)

...we hear it from everybody on the street. We also heard many bikers say, "Oh really? It is not legal to ride your bike on the sidewalk? Is that true?" And I was like, "Yeah, it is a pretty hefty fine." And then as we...

(05:54:13)

...consider enforcement proposals — I mean, you heard in terms of, you know, the NYPD is already issuing a ton of fines, and the amount of printed papers showing the fines, I think they have available to share — how do you think we can improve safety without creating unnecessary or disproportionate enforcement against delivery workers and...

(05:54:37)

...other cyclists? I think a major focus of our work is to appreciate that no one wants to be hit. Nobody necessarily wants to injure anybody else. So we think it is really important to have a positive campaign to tell people how to be good neighbors, how to be safe on the streets, and to believe that since nobody wants to be hurt or hurt anybody else, over time the cultural change will come and people will see that safety is important. That requires education. It requires good legislation for workers' rights, and we think these are parallel concepts. It does not have to be one or the other.

(05:55:21)

We cannot just think of short-term solutions. We are thinking long-term.

(05:55:24)

Thank you so much for your testimony. This panel is excused. All right, next up we have...

(05:55:35)

Sandy Robert... sorry, Sandy Reburn, Jacqueline Savage, Debra Farley, Elizabeth Chow and Christina Hanley, I believe.

(05:55:51)

All right. I will make sure to add you all in right now. One second. Anyone else?

(05:55:59)

Christina Hansen. All right. Now since we have a few more seats, I will also add Maxine De Seda, Susan Simon, Ron Wasiewski — my apologies — and then Kathleen Conry. You are not reading on... Sergeants, if we need to add an extra chair, can you please bring an extra chair for me? I will see. Okay, I will start with you, Maxine.

(05:56:52)

Please turn on the mic before you speak. Testing. Hello? Okay.

(05:57:02)

Maxine De Seda, a native New Yorker. All micro-mobility vehicles, especially Lyft Citi Bikes, must be speed-limited, licensed and registered. Pedestrians must not be afraid of crossing the street. Your 20% proposals are irrelevant in terms of safety for pedestrians and riders. If you choose not to support Priscilla's Law, you are endorsing by default the policy that the executive of Lyft, Citi Bike's parent company, has stated: that wider helmet laws and registration mandates could have a devastating effect on Citi Bike's business model.

Bike share data in 2025 showed a net profit of $24.6 million with revenue to the City. This means only 15% of their net profit was given back to the City that gives them taxpayer-funded curb space. Lyft-owned Citi Bike donates to Transportation Alternatives, a multi-million dollar nonprofit, one hundred thousand dollars yearly. Transportation Alternatives' mission is to reclaim New York City from cars, transforming our streets into sustainable... blah, blah, blah... to walk and bike. There is no mention of reclaiming New York City from for-profit car shares or Ubers that are causing Midtown congestion. Current DOT Streets Master Plan funding is nearly $39.5 million in fiscal year 2027 to design our streets with bike lanes that are useless for regular bikers. Thank you. Next.

(05:59:05)

Hello. My apologies for interrupting you, Susan. I want to remind the members of the public that this is a formal government proceeding and that decorum shall be observed at all times. Failure to maintain decorum can result in removal. Please keep it down in the chambers. Thank you very much. Sorry, go ahead. Proceed.

(05:59:25)

I am Susan Simon and I would like to say for the record that...

(05:59:31)

...20 of our victims at this point were forced to leave at the five-hour mark. I think that does a disservice to everyone here.

(05:59:44)

I have tried for five years. My community — I try to cope with and navigate the streets, sidewalks and parks of New York, trying to avoid the danger and havoc of unregulated electric motor bikes, for almost that long. Effective bills like Priscilla's Law have sat in this body and the State Legislature languishing, stopped in what can only be viewed as a betrayal of the safety and security of the public realm. While the number of serious injuries has exploded, we have been told that Priscilla's Law — licensing and registering e-bikes — would threaten many undocumented delivery workers. In fact, during Commissioner Tisch's application of civil summonses that had some teeth to hold riders accountable for traffic infractions and accidents, there was not a single report of an ICE arrest of anyone appearing in court to answer a civil summons. This is intended fear-mongering by those entities opposing any regulation or accountability for riders who do so recklessly. It is a fact that undocumented workers can get New York driver's licenses for cars and do so in spite of their status. Apparently, lawmakers are really not as concerned about this as they appear to be. Thank you.

(06:01:28)

For your testimony. And please, for folks who are cut off by the two-minute remarks, please submit your testimony in full online. It would be great. Appreciate it. Next.

(06:01:38)

I would like to start by thanking Julie for holding this hearing. My name is Jacqueline Savage. I will turn 77 on October 13. I am here to state the urgent need to pass Priscilla's Law, Int 0802 and Int 0377. Crossing the streets of New York City has become a nightmare. I should not have to turn my head around in all directions as well as use my peripheral vision to see the vehicles approaching me from all sides on a daily basis. It is terrifying. I am not Linda Blair — my head goes straight ahead and turns left and right, that is it, not 360 degrees around. Why are e-vehicles exempt from following the rules of the road? Cars need to do this to maintain order and safety. It is unconscionable that this situation exists. My fellow seniors as well as people with disabilities are the most vulnerable. Does not anyone care about these vulnerable groups, let alone other pedestrians? We need safe streets for all pedestrians, cars and bikes of all kinds. Our parks need to be free from e-bikes, e-scooters and the like, so people can truly enjoy the respite that parks provide rather than have these e-vehicles surrounding us. That is why we need common sense legislation. Thank you for your testimony. Next.

(06:03:46)

Good afternoon. My name is Elizabeth Chow. It is beyond time that our government addresses the safety and quality of life crisis that has been unleashed on pedestrians and cyclists by the reckless driving of electric motor bikes and scooters. I thank Speaker Menin and this Council for convening this hearing, but unfortunately the bills under consideration today will do little for the safety of New Yorkers because none of them addresses the critical issue of personal accountability. By all means, keep illegal vehicles off our streets. By all means, make delivery apps prioritize safety over profits. But you must also pass Priscilla's Law to require the registration, licensing and insurance of all electric motor vehicles. Without the accountability created by Priscilla's Law, all the other bills will be meaningless because enforcement will be impossible. Reckless driving of electric motor vehicles does not just happen on our streets and sidewalks — it also happens in our parks. These spaces are meant for recreation, not transportation. The Central Park Conservancy, the Parks Department and all of this government, instead of protecting these sanctuaries, have turned them into transportation superhighways for commuters and delivery drivers who use them to get somewhere else, not for their intended purpose. These vehicles bring the chaos and danger of our streets right into the only places we can go to escape them. And just like on our streets, there is zero enforcement.

You must pass Int 0277 banning electric motor vehicles from our parks. Thank you. Next.

(06:05:22)

Thank you, Majority Leader. My name is Ron... I had hoped that this would be a serious effort to finally implement common sense enforcement solutions to end the dangerous, chaotic free-for-all on our streets — going on for five years — that allows selfish, entitled bike riders who have made our lives a living hell to do exactly what they please without any accountability for their actions. No such luck. Calling the shots here are the e-bike lobbyists from Transportation Alternatives and their partners on City Council, who they have managed to employ through their clients. For example, Shaun, you received $259,000 from Uber in campaign contributions. That is a pretty good haul. I appreciate it. Congratulations. But does that color your judgment? I bet it does. Now, Priscilla's Law would license, register and insure all e-vehicles, finally making effective enforcement of existing laws possible. What is wrong with that? Sounds pretty reasonable to me. Well, Transportation Alternatives explains that they recklessly play the race card to claim, without evidence, that license plates would empower the NYPD to target immigrants and...

(06:06:52)

...exploit poor people of color, colluding with ICE to deport anyone they please. But that is not the reason they do it. They do it to make money. They fear that it will depress the profits of their clients — Uber, Lyft, et cetera. Transportation Alternatives does not care about immigrants and the poor. They are soulless. They victim-shame and parse the circumstances of the deaths of people killed by e-bikes with despicable cruelty. I have seen them do it to the victims that are in this room testifying before you. And you are going to allow them to get away with that? I have lost my time, but thank you.

(06:07:27)

Very much. Thank you. Next.

(06:07:31)

Good afternoon to what is left of the City Council, and thank you. My name is Kathleen Conry. I have lived in the aptly named Hell's Kitchen for nearly 50 years and, surprisingly, I am still alive. I first addressed this Council two years ago, hopeful that Priscilla's Law would be passed, as it seems like a no-brainer for those who are using their brain. But it seems that it has not even come to a ballot or a vote, and that is shocking. Good God, what are you waiting for — more people to die? I am not advocating that e-bikes and scooters and city bikes et cetera be banned. That would be ridiculous. They all need to have their rights on the road. But it is imperative that all people — pedestrians, car drivers, truckers, buses, anyone who chooses to use bikes of any kind — obey the rules of the road. We all need to be equally accountable to the law, and if you do not support that, you should not even be here.

But on the other hand — seriously, folks — I should thank you for not passing Priscilla's Law. You have made me a better citizen and a more careful pedestrian, because I now realize that I am the only person capable of maintaining my own safety. Now I encourage other people on the street to be vigilant, watching for bikes going back and forth, and not to use their phones while crossing in crosswalks. We all need to be as responsible as those we are afraid of who are not. So it is time for you to do your part — what you agreed to do when elected — or just do the right thing for all New Yorkers: pedestrians, tourists, families and even strangers. If we all follow the law — Priscilla's Law — thank you very much.

(06:09:36)

You are welcome. It is okay. Next.

(06:09:41)

I am Julie Harvey. A vehicle was speeding down and ran a stop sign. That vehicle suddenly slammed into a pedestrian who was in the crosswalk. The pedestrian was knocked to the ground. Her head hit the pavement hard. Blood spewed from the back of her head. She was unable to move. This speeding vehicle was a bicyclist in Central Park who will suffer no consequences for destroying somebody's life. That pedestrian is me, and I am very lucky to be alive. Cyclists need to accept responsibility for the risks they are taking. At this point, everyone else is paying for the cyclist's risks. The entire city is being redesigned with bike lanes. However, these lanes do not teach cyclists the rules of the road. They have only made cyclists more arrogant and abusive. Bike lanes do not protect pedestrians — they actually bring dangerous, uninsured traffic to the pedestrian's feet. Speeding bikes are like mosquitoes, flying around unnoticed and recklessly close to others. Cyclists just make up their own rules, causing great harm by dangerous driving, and they suffer no consequences for their actions. We need laws to regulate and punish offenders. Laws will create fairer conditions for all road users. At this point, cyclists are allowed to get away with murder. This is gross and willful neglect by our City officials. Please pass the proposed bills — e-bikes do not belong in Central Park. We need registered license plates, education, testing and enforcement. Thank you very much.

(06:11:47)

This panel is excused. No questions. Harvey, you are out of order. This panel is excused.

(06:11:59)

All right, next. We have added Rita Sanchez, Juan Carlos, Alpha Barry, Ferno Mama Diallo — some of whom have left. So I am going to make sure that I get at least seven of you here. So whoever is here, just come on up. That way I know how many names I have to call. So now we are trying to have the same panel here. All right, I will keep asking for more names. Suraj, Mandel, Fouda, Sata Kamata — we have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. All right, I think we are ready to roll. And just so that we know who you are, state your name for the record. That way we make sure we do not miss you if you are here. Cool. Please.

(06:13:19)

Please sit on your mic and do not start yet. Please start her time over. Okay.

(06:13:25)

Good afternoon, members of the City Council. My name is Maria Sanchez, co-founder of the Worker Justice Project and organizing director of Los Deliveristas Unidos. I am here to oppose Int 2361, Int 2587 and Int 0986, and to call on the City Council to add strong worker protection provisions to every bill affecting delivery workers. I am really sorry for all of the accidents people have suffered. I am really sorry that you have to go through this. But believe me, delivery workers cannot afford safety. It is not in their hands to decide how fast they are going, how fast they are driving, if they cannot afford to prioritize safety. Why? Because companies are pushing them to deliver faster and faster. I know, and I heard that some companies were here saying they only flag workers when they were crossing. The reason why they were calculating the time — it is not true. From February to June we have seen thousands of workers with deactivations for lateness, low ratings from customers complaining about being late. It is not true that workers cannot afford safety — not even for themselves, nor for the people around them. And the workers are not the only ones who are supposed to be handling all of these responsibilities. There are many regular drivers. There are many people who need to be held accountable on this issue, not only the delivery workers. We want safe streets for all of us.

We must address the pressure workers face every day and close the loopholes in Int 1332 before it takes effect next year. Workers need protection from all forms of deactivation, not only permanent deactivations. Apps can temporarily log workers out, cut their access to schedules and put them back on waiting lists. Our new report, driven by algorithms and based on more than 800 delivery workers, shows that it is happening every hour. When it is happening, I always... Thank you so much.

(06:15:29)

Thank you. Next. And please say your name.

(06:15:33)

Good afternoon. My name is Abu Bakar Chi, and thank you for the opportunity to speak. I am concerned that these bills do not do enough to protect delivery workers. I want to speak from my own experience as a delivery worker. I oppose Int 2361, Int 2587 and Int 0986. We are not criminals. We are workers supporting our families. More police enforcement and bike confiscation will not make our streets safe. We cannot leave delivery workers to live and work in front of the conditions that create many of those problems. My request to the City Council is also specific...

(06:16:09)

...and we need more protected and clearly marked bike lanes wherever possible. For example, there are no bike spots left in Manhattan from 17th Street near Park Avenue South to... Give delivery workers a safer way to travel. When streets do not have safe bike infrastructure, delivery workers can be forced to ride in dangerous traffic, go the wrong way or use the sidewalk just to complete a delivery. Some traffic configurations are designed in a way that does not work well. If you are riding around 15 miles per hour, you can travel several blocks but are constantly stopping at every traffic light. That pressure could lead some riders to...

(06:16:51)

...take risks such as going through a red light, riding on the sidewalk or riding against traffic. We have also seen deadly crashes on some of New York's busiest streets. On a date in 2026, a food delivery worker on a bike was struck on West 125th Street and died. On September 28, 2026, a delivery worker on a bike was killed on West 4th Street after being struck by a dump truck. And on September 18, 2026, at... Street and First Avenue, a commercial truck struck a bicycle, injuring two teenage girls. Those roads are too dangerous. Thank you so much. I appreciate you. Thank you very much. Next.

(06:17:41)

Thank you for giving me time to speak. I want to explain how Uber was giving false information. I have evidence against them. They deserve a fine because they said they have rules — they do not respect the rules. They give you a time that makes it impossible to deliver on time. You...

(06:18:13)

...have to deliver the order before it is released, or you get a violation. Because they give you one violation, two violations...

(06:18:23)

...today, three violations — you are deactivated. You have to find another thing to do.

(06:18:29)

I have been deactivated because I did not deliver the order in the time they gave me. Uber is giving false information. And now we have companies like Grubhub and others, and now we have to deal with a city where everyone has this problem. The problem is now delivery is controlled by these companies, but a minute... and also I want to apologize — there have been some vehicle accidents and they take everything. Not everything is an e-bike. Also...

(06:19:42)

...I have more to say but I do not have time. Thank you. Please submit your full testimony and we will make sure to...

(06:19:49)

...read it. Next. Hello. Good afternoon. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak. My name is... I am a delivery worker in New York. I am here to explain my opposition to Int 2361, Int 2587 and Int 0986. I also want to share my concerns about the response to the problems that delivery workers face every day on our streets. Instead of addressing the real problems we face, the City is considering expanding police powers to give officers more ability to issue tickets and confiscate bikes. That could also make e-bikes that workers legally ride subject to confiscation, and give delivery apps less responsibility for worker safety. We all know that delivery apps do not care about workers. We need more protected bike lanes. We need secure bike parking. We need better protection against unfair deactivation. Safety is very important to us. We also want safe streets, but these bills will not address the problems we face every day and will not make delivery work safer. We need real solutions that protect workers, improve safety and make New York City safe for everyone. Thank you so much for giving me the opportunity. My account was deactivated one year ago. I do not have anything to do around...

(06:21:23)

...I am so confused. I have more to say. My account was deactivated in September 2025. My account was deactivated and I do not have any income. I am not able to work for another company. I am concerned about what the police will do. If we have a solution, help me continue this work. I do not know what happened — I finished my work at 12 p.m. on Monday morning. Thank you. Can you tell me your name again just to make sure we got that? Thank you very much.

(06:22:04)

Next. Hello. Good afternoon. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak. My name is Jonah Mamadou. I am a delivery worker in New York City and a member of Los Deliveristas Unidos. I was deactivated by Uber after a facial verification took longer because I needed to remove my helmet to take a clear picture. I explained what happened but Uber refused to recognize it. Losing access to the app means losing my income and putting my housing at risk. We all want safe streets, but policies like Int 0244-2026 should not force delivery workers to choose between safety and survival. As an immigrant delivery worker, I am concerned that this bill could put a target on workers like me. When we are simply trying to earn a living, giving law enforcement additional reasons to stop delivery workers could lead to more document checks, more tickets and greater risk for workers who are already vulnerable. Instead of simply restricting our bikes, the City should help workers comply with safety requirements through a gradual, collaborative effort. Solutions such as speed limiters...

(06:23:58)

...or speed bumps — the City should also invest more...

(06:24:03)

In Safe Streets Strong Too Project, deliver walking. Thank

(06:24:07)

Thank you very much. I really appreciate your testimony. Next, a beautiful...

(06:24:17)

The... to hold...

(06:24:21)

Good afternoon. My name is David... I am a delivery worker and member of the delivery union. I am here today because I was deactivated from my account because of one customer complaint. I have a five-star rating and worked 18 months. I was deactivated with 13,200 deliveries done, because of all their complaints against me. I need help because I do not have any delivery work. I only do that — I do not have work. I need help. Please. I have kids. I have my wife. Please. I need help. The people need work.

(06:25:05)

Please, when you have... Thank you for giving me the opportunity for that. Thank you. I appreciate you.

(06:25:09)

Just fine. Next. Hello? Hi. My name is... well, I do not know what to say. It is the first time I am speaking in one of these places. Well, the reason I am here is because I am not happy, and I am not agreeing with many updates, new updates. What is happening is that they make new rules and new updates every single time. A lot of the people who are doing the deliveries are not happy with that. Because what we have got... like one of my... what is that... as this gentleman just said, we have got a family to take care of. We got... I mean, we try to work to survive.

And also, in my case, I am not agreeing with the new rules. Let me give an example. I mean, I have been working since 2019, and I have had two accidents and four surgeries. I also have two children. One of my children... I am sorry for my English... my child, to my understanding, has autism. And now I have been blocked from the app. My account is blocked. I do not know how to...

(06:27:04)

Collect the...

(06:27:04)

I am sorry. Yeah, it is activated and that is why I am here, because there are many things I mean, we are not happy with. Also, every single time, like me, I bring my bag to my house every single day.

(06:27:18)

And how... Thank you very much. I really appreciate this panel. You are excused.

(06:27:26)

Now you get to... oh, excuse... okay, go. Thank you. I just want folks to know we still have over a hundred people registered to speak. Just to provide some context here in terms of patience. The next panel is Vladimir from the New York Immigration Coalition, Darrell Reardon from Cooney, Erik McLaurin, Dhiraj Ganja, Gonzalo Mercado, Sister Nina. Sorry. I like your glasses. Thank you all. Right. You begin and please state your name. Thank you. I am sorry, what is going on... asked me to call him in because she...

(06:28:35)

What is your name? Sorry.

(06:28:40)

Sarah, your last name. Okay, I will make sure to add you. There were... where you are in the order, we are trying to... I understand. It has been a very long day. I understand. All right.

(06:28:55)

Thank you so much. My name is Vladimir... I am the Senior Policy Strategist at the New York Metro Coalition. I want to be direct about why we are here. Nearly every bill on today's agenda answers the same question the same way: who enforces the rules on our streets? And the answer, over and over again, is the New York Police Department.

We are here to tell you all that this answer does not bring us closer to community safety, and in 2026 it is in fact dangerous for communities. The New York City Department of Transportation should be the agency responsible for regulating, educating and enforcing micro-mobility rules in this city, not the police. Every NYPD stop is a risk our neighbors cannot afford right now. The Council knows firsthand what is happening in each of our neighborhoods. Federal immigration agents are operating in our homes and our streets, our courthouses and across our entire city. For delivery workers, it is not just a ticket — it could be a warrant, it could be a full entry into the deportation pipeline. We have already seen what NYPD does when they can stop cyclists and it is not great. Give them the opportunity and they will do the harshest enforcement.

(06:30:01)

We oppose Int 0986-2026, Int 0110-2026, Int 0244-2026, Int 0078-2026 and Int 0214-2026. We recommend amending Int 0787-2026 to clarify that reporting should not include communications with federal immigration enforcement without any warrant. We support Int 0985-2026 with amendments that guarantee that funding will be available for all workers that need it. We are urging the Council to strike NYPD as the enforcing agency across this package of bills. The confiscation and empowerment penalties will add serious risks for workers and New Yorkers. Be safe and fully fund the training program. Thank you so much. Thank you.

(06:30:54)

Next. Hi, my name is Darrell Reardon and I am speaking on behalf of the Delivery Worker and Health Study Team. We actually gave you this paperwork already. The Workers Justice Project team surveyed 561 delivery workers this spring and our just-released report, "Driven by Algorithms," that we handed you is submitted to the Committee along with our testimony. The findings from our study are stark: 53% of workers report a work-related injury — more than five times the national rate. 40% have severe psychological distress, five times the rate among adult New Yorkers. Algorithms are behind the negative health effects. Over 80% say the apps decide their speed, routes and hours, and 52% feared deactivation if they do not deliver fast enough. For 96%, this is their only job, and the threat of deactivation and shift limits pushes workers to take risks that endanger them and the public.

These bills tackle a real problem as e-bikes become a permanent part of our streets, and we support those that improve street design, education and crash data. But as drafted, nine of the bills on today's agenda could have serious unintended consequences. Local Law 34, aimed at preventing unjust deactivations, does not cover temporary lockouts, and it exempts deactivations the law would require. Some of these bills would mandate lockouts and others would make deactivation easier to justify, giving apps the ability to cut out workers and push them to rush even more. Our written testimony details our recommendations. Finally, Local Law 34 should be amended to cover temporary lockouts. Blocking caps and shift limits — safer streets require limiting the apps' power to make workers rush. We urge the Council to aim at the root causes of unsafe streets: the algorithms and business decisions of platform delivery companies. Thank you. Thank you, Erik.

(06:33:09)

Thank you, Majority Leader Abreu and your staff for the opportunity to speak today. My name is Eric McLaurin. I am the Executive Director of Streets Pack. I would like to talk about a four-point framework for improving micro-mobility safety.

Number one: 20 is plenty. That should be the top speed permitted on most City streets. Any powered micro-mobility device capable of speeds exceeding 20 miles per hour should be phased out, should not be operated by clients, and should not be classified or marketed as an e-bike or scooter. Number two: stopping the sale of illegal and noncompliant high-speed devices. The sale of high-speed devices masquerading as legal e-bikes — they do not possess a vehicle identification number necessary for registration — must be banned at point of sale to prevent their use on City streets. Three: holding delivery apps accountable. Companies must end unreasonable delivery expectations and stop incentivizing unsafe behavior. They should be licensed and regulated by the Department of Consumer and Worker Protection. They should be required to provide liability insurance for workers making deliveries on their behalf. As the driven-by-algorithms report released yesterday by Cooney and the Workers Justice Project underscored, delivery workers operate under tremendous pressure. They face outsized physical danger and psychological stress just doing their jobs. Four: increasing safety through better street design. Complete street designs are proven to improve safety for all users.

In order to improve safety around micro-mobility use, the City should prioritize implementation of physically protected bike lanes, speed up the installation of hardened daylighting at intersections, and lower speed limits to 20 miles per hour wherever it is allowed by Sammy's Law, among other measures.

Just really quickly on some of the legislation — I will not take all of them today, but we support Int 0244-2026, CM Hudson's bill, which phases out the sale and use of class three bikes. We support Int 0985-2026, your bill, which creates a trade-in program that would work hand in hand with hers. We support also your bill that would ban the deceptive marketing of high-speed devices as e-bikes. And CM Restler's Int 0960-2026, we also support. Thank you very much for your testimony. Thank you. Okay.

(06:35:21)

Darryl had to leave. I am going to be reading his statement on his behalf.

(06:35:26)

Good morning, Chairs Abreu and Epstein, Council Members. My name is Raj... and I am offering testimony on behalf of the New York City Democratic Socialists of America. I co-chair a transit working group, a body chartered this year to expand our organizing around transportation and infrastructure issues. We appreciate the spirit of this hearing, particularly the focus on pedestrian and worker safety. However, most of the proposed legislative solutions fall short in terms of their potential impact. The bills in this package for the most part address individual behavior, leaving systemic issues unaddressed and ignoring proven infrastructure solutions to street safety. We oppose bills that place additional burden and responsibility on workers and individual cyclists rather than apps or sellers, or bills that provide additional grounds for police to randomly stop cyclists and workers. Unfortunately, there are many bills in this package that fall into both categories. Alternatively, we urge the Council to call for solutions that address the conditions actually producing unsafe streets. That means investing in protected bike infrastructure and other street redesigns that better organize our streets to keep people safe and meet the needs of users. Far too often, Council Members are opposing projects like these either publicly or behind the scenes, or choose not to champion the

(06:36:36)

other proven safety treatments. Along with legislation and funding to support them, these should be prioritized as well, including daylighting intersections, expanding protected intersections for cyclists, plus sporting islands and curb extensions to slow traffic, and expanding pedestrian-friendly space across the City. We urge the Council to more aggressively examine and address the role delivery apps and other platforms play in shaping working conditions on our streets. Tech billionaires should not be permitted to gamify the scarce public space of our streets. Delivery workers should not be expected to absorb the risk created by unrealistic delivery times and quotas or any other exploitative mandates imposed by companies. If the Council is serious about worker and pedestrian safety, legislation should place meaningful responsibility on corporations that organize and profit from this labor. We recognize that some progress has been made in this regard. Thank you very much for your testimony.

(06:37:28)

Next.

(06:37:28)

Thank you, Majority Leader Abreu. My name is Gonzalo with the National Day Laborer Organizing Network. NDLON is a network of organizations that represent immigrant workers. I am encouraged by the New York City Council's commitment to ensure all workers can have a safe workplace free from exploitation. Delivery workers experience difficulties every day with every delivery they complete, such as injuries and fatalities, unjust deactivations, street crime and e-bike theft, and pressure to deliver faster, just to name a few. While we strongly support measures to increase safety, we are concerned that some of these proposals will adversely impact thousands of delivery workers. We are particularly concerned about the following proposals due to the increased NYPD interaction that could result in widespread bike confiscations, deactivations and other adverse effects on delivery workers. In addition, these proposals fail to regulate the algorithms that force workers to make deliveries as quickly as possible and do not create a transition plan to be able to afford to make these changes.

Creating proposals that truly protect the safety of delivery workers and their workplace — the streets — requires conversations and planning with those workers themselves and the organizations that represent them. The list below responds to each bill in more detail, which I have submitted. But in the interest of time, we encourage the City Council to meet and discuss these concerns with delivery workers and advocates such as our member organization the Workers Justice Project, along with the delivery system Unidos, who have been at the forefront of the struggle to improve the lives of delivery workers exploited by giant multinational corporations. We thank the New York City Council for the opportunity to offer this testimony and we look forward to continuing to collaborate to advance protections that can improve the lives of all New Yorkers. Thank you.

(06:39:22)

Thank you. For your testimony, this panel is excused. Next we have Sarah O'Dea, Baron Johnson, Alexander... Tarsa Crisp.

(06:39:38)

Jerrod Knee, Williams and Amy. You begin please, and please press the button. Yes.

(06:40:09)

Good afternoon. I am Sarah O'Dea. Late last year I was crossing the street and was hit sideways by a bicycle. It was... I think I am fortunate that I was in terrific shape, but it did cause me to have a complete hip replacement. The ball was knocked off the bone by the force of the hit. And I tell you this really for three reasons. One, I think motorized bicycles — it was motorized, a very fat-wheeled motorized bike — I think should be required to have a license and insurance. And then I also hear of this proposal to have a 20-mile-an-hour speed limit, which I think is ridiculous. I do not think this bicycle was going eight miles an hour when it hit me, but the damage it did was enormous. So would anybody like to be hit at 20 miles an hour and see how they survived? I just think 10 would be more normal. People walk at three. And a regular bicycle rider only pedals probably five, maybe six, unless they are racing. But if you are just bicycling on the street you do not bicycle at 20 miles an hour. You just do not. And the other thing is, I think it is fine to have regulations, but if they are not enforced, what is the point?

(06:42:06)

Thank you so much for your testimony.

(06:42:07)

You are welcome. Hi. My name is Tarsa Crisp. I am here because I think that we have become far too comfortable asking EMTs and paramedics in our City to personally subsidize a public health system with our time, our bodies and our financial security.

In March 2025, New York City changed its 911 destination policy because we could no longer afford to keep scarce ambulances out of service on longer transports. I think that tells us something important. The system is rationing its time. But patients do not experience hospitals as interchangeable. When someone has repeatedly felt dismissed, mistreated or unsafe at the hospital closest to them, they refuse care altogether. That leaves both patients and providers in an impossible position. A person may delay emergency care, decline transport, or then later rely on private means to reach a hospital farther away where they believe they will actually be heard and appropriately treated.

This should make us all feel deeply uncomfortable. We tell EMTs to become better clinicians, get more education, and then we hand them tuition bills and hundreds of hours of clinical and field training while they are already working overtime or multiple jobs just to live. Working for you should not have to mean giving up your life to learn how to save somebody else's. We know this City understands the principle that essential workers deserve economic protection. Just last week, the Mamdani administration secured a $131.5 million settlement after delivery workers were underpaid. The City has said clearly that systems cannot be allowed to function by exploiting the workers that they depend upon. EMS deserves that same urgency. This City already knows that there is a problem. The Council proposed $50 million in recurring funding to begin addressing pay parity, because low wages have contributed to recruitment and retention problems. Bring that proposal back this year. New York City enacted a law requiring... actually available to respond and how many cannot. So we are measuring this shortage. Now I believe it is our job to address one of the conditions creating it. It is essential infrastructure and the City cannot afford to adequately pay, educate, equip and... Thank you very much.

(06:44:12)

Thank you. Members of the public, please speak on legislation and oversight topics that are being heard today, so try to keep your comments to the hearing topic. Thank you.

(06:44:30)

Good afternoon, members of the City Council. My name is Amy. For the past five years I have served as an EMT for private providers. I am currently on a break from field service, and taking that step back has given me a very clear view of why so many dedicated, experienced responders are walking away from this profession.

When a resident calls 911, they expect rapid, high-quality emergency care. But having spent five years on the street, I can tell you that our system is reaching a dangerous breaking point. To show you what this looks like in practice: last year I was dispatched to a patient experiencing a severe mental health crisis. Because of system-wide staffing shortages and the lack of open units, it took almost 45 minutes. Yes, you heard that right — 45 minutes just to arrive on scene. By the time we walked through the door, the patient had already injured themselves terribly. That delay was not caused by a lack of effort from our crew.

(06:45:20)

It was caused by a system that routinely leaves entire neighborhoods undercovered. We are losing qualified EMTs and paramedics to burnout, unlivable wages and grueling working conditions faster than we can replace them. On top of that, units are routinely held for hours outside overcrowded emergency departments waiting to transfer care, trapping available ambulances at hospitals when they are needed most on the street.

I urge the City Council to protect our emergency medical infrastructure in the upcoming budget cycle by supporting competitive compensation for all, to fix the critical retention crisis, not being paid minimum wage, to set hospital offload time limits so units can return to service as soon as possible. When response times lag, our communities face real, preventable harm. Protecting our emergency medical infrastructure is not just an administrative detail. It is a matter of life and death. Thank you for your time and leadership.

(06:46:18)

So I think we have a panel. I believe you — your intention is to testify at a related hearing. Is that correct?

(06:46:27)

Yes. So we are here for the worker management oversight. Yeah, this is.

(06:46:33)

A different hearing, which makes sense why we are getting a lot of topics. What we will do is, if you could just submit your written testimony — I mean, if you would like to testify on the issues before us today you can, but I think what you are speaking about is related to a different hearing. Is this public safety? It is not. Yeah. Sorry, it is public fire, but...

(06:46:58)

It is not fire, but this is regarding public safety. Yeah, this is regarding public safety, and tied to public safety as much as you can. We will do all right.

(06:47:06)

Go ahead. Proceed. Okay.

(06:47:09)

My name is Gerard Williams. I am a United States Army veteran. I am a New York City paramedic. I am a former New York City correction officer. I work now in New York City as a paramedic.

I just wanted to take time to talk about something that is a severe staffing shortage and crisis in the City. Response times are out of control. I myself have responded to multiple emergencies with people being hit by bikes, people being knocked unconscious by bikes. I have seen the injuries that these cause, and I can say that we need more ambulances on the street. As of recently, New York City cut ambulances, which has increased response times. Also, hospitals that participate in the New York City 911 system have determined they want to cut ambulances, which makes response times go up. So these accidents that people are having when they are being hit by bikes — it will be longer before an ambulance gets to you.

Unfortunately, hospitals are putting profits over patients, and this is the result of that. Since last year, dozens of units have been taken out of service. Hospitals refuse to replace them, making our 911 system less efficient. Earlier this summer I responded to people stabbed on the Upper West Side. I was coming from the East Side, from a hospital right next to Central Park. It took me about 10 minutes longer than it would have taken me if there had been an ambulance on the West Side. So these are critical times, and in these times where they are cutting Medicaid, we need more ambulances on the street, not less.

(06:48:55)

Thank you for your testimony. Next. Oh, wow. Hey, how are you doing?

(06:49:02)

My name is Baron Johnson, also a paramedic in New York City. I came here today wondering what I could possibly say in such a short amount of time, because the truth is I could speak for days about what the very people who dedicate their lives to helping others are left feeling — unprotected themselves.

I sit here today speaking for the men and women who dedicate their lives to helping others, often putting their lives and safety at risk. Every day EMTs and paramedics walk into situations most people could never imagine. We witness violence, tragedies and death. Yet we are still expected to remain calm, professional and compassionate. We sacrifice our bodies, our time, our families and sometimes our mental health, but we keep coming back because we love what we do. We want to be a beacon of hope for people in the worst moments of their lives.

But today I have one question: who takes care of us when we are assaulted, when we are threatened and when we are forced to defend ourselves? Who stands up for us — risking their own life and protecting their career? We took an oath to help people, but we did not take an oath to become punching bags. We deserve protection. We deserve support. We deserve to go home safely to our families without feeling that defending ourselves could cost us our livelihood. So today I am asking our elected officials, health care leaders, unions and communities to stand with us. Enough is enough. When society needs us to show up — when someone cannot breathe, we show up. When someone is dying, we show up. Thank you very much.

(06:51:03)

Thank you very much for your testimony. This panel is excused. Next up we have Jared Swazi, Mark Tabas, Nick Matthew, Jason Frame... please make your way up. We do not have a hard stop. We are going through the whole night. Peter Read, Ira Gershwin Horn — see you over here. I understand that folks have left, so we are going to make sure we get to everybody. Illinois here, Carrie Flaherty, Gorman Riley. All right, we have Gorman here. Carlos, Elaine, Ali, Sumana, Harry, Suara. All right. Simon is here. We have space for a few more. Chris Sanders.

I was my name. You are just... well, we will add you to the next panel. We have had a lot of people here who have to go. Yeah, this is. Who is in this panel that is next, just so you are aware. Please.

(06:53:24)

Good afternoon. My name is Jared Swazi. I am here on behalf of Upway, where we are a caravan of bikes. We also co-chair the Next Mile Coalition, an industry group advocating for sensible micro-mobility policy. Upway's headquarters is in Brooklyn, where we sell high-quality, safety-tested electric bikes, and we want more New Yorkers riding them. E-bikes are a great equalizer. They flatten hills, cost less than a car, reduce traffic and cut pollution.

Upway is committed to connecting more New Yorkers to affordable, street-legal vehicles. Unfortunately, the market is currently flooded with a very different product — illegal e-motos that can hit more than 50 miles per hour, being sold online as e-bikes. These are not e-bikes and they meet none of the safety standards that companies like Upway are committed to. They invite people to ride recklessly and have been involved in a majority of fatal micro-mobility crashes in New York City. We are encouraged by positive movement at the state level. Bill S.10700 would help stop e-moto sales in New York online. We strongly encourage the Council to focus your attention on bills that will rein in these high-speed devices.

To that end, Upway supports Int 0244, which ends the sale of Class 3 e-bikes in the City — which we believe 20 is plenty. Int 0988, which stops sellers from passing off non-registerable vehicles as e-bikes. This bill, however, should be amended to also target e-motos, which cannot be registered and should not be sold in our City. Int 0985, which lets riders exchange illegal devices for legal ones — it needs real funding to work, but it is getting dangerous vehicles off the road equitably. Upway has a large warehouse with more than a thousand high-quality, affordable bikes on hand, plus lithium-ion recycling capacity, and would be interested. Thank you.

(06:55:33)

Very much. Hi. My name is Ira Gershwin Horn. I am 74. I live on the Upper West Side, in CM Abreu's district, near Gale Brewer's district. I

(06:55:42)

rely on my bike to go shopping, go swimming and tend to a community garden, and do many community-oriented tasks like being a New York City Park steward, filling a community food fridge and being a Cycling Without Age pilot. Safety in numbers — I do not love delivery workers on their e-bikes. I do not love bike clubs, but safety in numbers: they make my shopping rides safer, so that is more important than loving them.

Affordability — I bike where I want. Getting rid of my car and using a bicycle saves me a ton of money and time. It allows me to volunteer in my community. I am not sitting in a car or looking for a spot.

Infrastructure, and not more laws — infrastructure, infrastructure, infrastructure. Do not create laws requiring registration of e-bikes. You will reduce safety, create complication and greatly reduce affordability. I support these bills: Int 0244, sponsored by CM Hudson; Int 0988, sponsored by CM Abreu; Int 0095, sponsored by CM Brewer; and Int 0950, sponsored by CM Schulman.

(06:57:12)

That is it. Thank you. Next.

(06:57:16)

My name is Richard... Council members, today I want to congratulate you on an amazing accomplishment. In the space of five going on six years, with truly little or no effort at all, you have created a whole new class of New York City citizens. What is remarkable is that this new elite class comes from all walks of life, a wide age range, and it encompasses the richest and the poorest.

Now, the new class does not have a name, but I can tell you who they are and why. They are both city cyclists and e-bike riders, pedicab drivers, e-bike delivery workers and the vendors who hire those workers, and they are allowed to freely flaunt not only the rules of the roads and lanes they ride on, but even the City laws governing those roads and lanes. Why are they elite? Because they cannot be held accountable for any offense they commit or law they break. It would take too long to list all those offenses, but the worst of them includes endangering or physically injuring another human being.

You want to take a look at your creation? Spend an afternoon walking in my neighborhood along Ninth and Tenth Avenues between 59th Street and 34th Street. A weekend would be the best, or even an afternoon in Central Park, and behold your creation. Stop your safety lip service and stop accepting campaign financing from the wolf in cheap clothing that is Transportation Alternatives. Pass Priscilla's Law. And I just want to quickly say: you invited your constituency here to speak on this issue, and most of us who have been here since 10 a.m. this morning do not have the pleasure of speaking to even half the committee. Thank you very much.

(06:59:24)

Next.

(06:59:25)

Please, please, please do not start the time yet. Please put on the mic. Okay.

(06:59:30)

Thank you. Good afternoon. My name is Gorman Riley. I am a member of the Board of Directors of Civitas Citizens Inc. Civitas, a nonprofit community organization, was founded in 1981. For the past 45 years it has been working to improve quality of urban life in El Barrio, East Harlem and the Upper East Side of Manhattan.

Civitas strongly supports several of the pending bills under consideration today: Int 0244, Int 0988, Int 0985 and Int 0950, for the persuasive and compelling reasons already set forth in testimony today. In addition, Civitas supports Int 1066, but with a simple but helpful amendment. Int 1066 would require the City to study and install traffic calming devices in bike paths. The Civitas amendment seeks to modify the term "traffic calming device" to specifically include a program of signage at the bike paths with clear language that gives continuing notice to all of, among other things, a prohibition against usage by motorcycles, mopeds and other high-speed mobility devices, and a speed limit of 20 miles per hour.

Just having a law on the books is not enough. There has to be widespread notice and a continuing reminder of what is allowed and what is not. Only a permanent program of signage at significant entry points along the bike path can bring about the necessary change. Thank you. Saved by the bell.

(07:01:38)

Hi. My name is Samana... I am in my mid-40s. I live in Jackson Heights. I am here just as a volunteer, as a cyclist, but not a very good one. I want to tell you that street-legal bikes help me, a not-very-good cyclist, ride more safely, because they help me stop.

So on a conventional bike, every time I come to a complete stop at a stop sign or a stoplight and then push off again, it uses a little energy, and that adds up. Let us say a 25-minute ride from Jackson Heights to Astoria to help a friend with child care or go to a doctor's appointment — that is maybe like nine stops at stoplights and stop signs. I am not very strong. I do not have abs of steel. I am in jeans, not Lycra. No matter how much I try to load up on protein and carbs ahead of time, it is going to tire me to make all those full stops and then come rolling again. But then on an e-bike, it is so much easier to start from a full stop. If you have never ridden an e-bike, that is one of the game changers about it that we do not necessarily talk about enough.

So for me, pedal-assist bikes take away any temptation to just roll through a stop sign at an empty intersection, because I can stop as much as I need to and then still have the energy I need to do what I need to do when I get there, like help take care of my friend's five-year-old. I do not need illegal high-speed devices. 20 is plenty to help me safely share our streets with drivers. The only collision I have ever been in as a bicycle rider while cycling was when a driver of a car rear-ended me while I was stopped at a red light. Of course, separated bike paths help, and they would have changed this, but most of my rides, most of my miles, I am sharing the road with cars. Street-legal e-bikes help me do that safely.

(07:03:36)

Thank you. Thank you for that perspective. Next. All right.

(07:03:42)

Thank you, Speaker Menin. Thank you, CM Abreu. I am Chris Sanders. I live in Midtown Manhattan, City Council District 4. I am here because I am the recently elected co-chair of the unpaid, volunteer-led Manhattan Activist Committee. I want to support bike safety and pedestrian safety with Int 0244, Int 0950, Int 0095, Int 0988 and Int 1004, for the globally accepted standard speed for e-bikes of 20 miles per hour. I support the City Council legislation that officially adopts this standard right here in New York City.

I support safety with improved lookout and other wayfinding signage, protecting pedestrians, getting dangerously fast bikes and other devices off the streets, and compelling the duty to complete an organized network of safe and protected bike lanes in every borough and every neighborhood. Safety for pedestrians and bikes must be the outcome of this meeting. Ridiculous and unworkable licensing schemes are a huge distraction that does not improve safety for people. We need the legislation to streamline the process for building out a cost-effective and protected bike lane network, with new signage that increases pedestrian safety, and ensure safe, low-speed e-bikes all become New York normal. Thank you for letting me speak.

(07:05:26)

For safety. Speaker Menin, Chairman Abreu, and shout out to CM Virginia Maloney, CM Harvey Epstein, CM Carl Wilson and CM Christopher Marte. I appreciate your testimony and congrats on your new gig. This panel is excused.

(07:05:44)

Thanks. The next panel we have: Mary Allen, Cristina Hansen, Tonette Rivera, Charles de Souza. Let me see how many folks are here. My apologies — I have a lot of names today. My apologies, but I am glad that

(07:06:16)

you are here. Kinberg, Judy Kinberg, Lauren... Lauren Lion Glasser, Janine Iorio. Janine. Okay. Rose Lynn Ako and Siegel. Gale Benjamin, Christina Font, Anneli, Linda Lopez, Peggy Yanis, Susan Lee, Ellen Sandals — come on up — and Anne Sherman. All right, all right. Did you have any person here? Sergeant, can you get them to come up?

(07:07:45)

Since we are going to — we are going to. This is of your...

(07:07:57)

I have a spot for one more. All right.

(07:08:08)

Start me.

(07:08:10)

Yes, it is finally... all right. So my name... my apologies. Can we also get an appearance card for the gentleman here? All right. Let me just wait for the individual to fill out an appearance card. And remember to say your names.

(07:08:42)

Before you speak, you... Begin. Hello, everyone. My name is Rivera. This is my first time in a Council meeting. I used to be an employee with the City. I used to work for 300 Broadway, to be specific. Moving forward, let us talk about my experience. I was 20 weeks pregnant. I was hit by a motorist on one of these bikes, and pretty much what is crazy is the gentleman looked like these young men right here behind me. So moving forward, I was hit while I was 20 weeks pregnant with my son. I was admitted into the hospital and I was forced to have my son at 28 weeks prematurely. They made me stay in the hospital for that time being due to that hit, that impact.

So what I am saying is I am a natural, like, born in New York. All my life, almost 40 years old, I never once got hit by a vehicle, by a car. I grew up around cars. I grew up in cars. I am a careful driver. Everyone is coming up here and the only thing that I see is everyone pointing fingers at infrastructure, pointing fingers at the corporations that have given these people jobs, but you did not say what happened with the drivers. They are the ones who are in charge of those devices. I am a driver. If I get tickets, I have to pay. If I get in trouble, I have to do defensive driving courses. I have to go to court.

So I mean, what is wrong? We are passing Priscilla's Law. What is wrong with making sure that they register their vehicles, they get insurance, so now when they do hit pedestrians it can be covered? At the same time, the young man that hit me, he did not know any English. He did not have an answer for me and he just got up and got on his bike and went about his way. But yet I am in the hospital and then my baby had to spend time in the NICU for the next three months before he could come home.

So moving forward, I think we should put more of the blame onto the drivers. They need to be taught to be more responsible. The speed limit needs to be dropped down. Thank you. And I will say that immigrants got the job done. Next. Put your...

(07:10:53)

Time is up. Your time is up. Stop it. I have been working hard all my life in this City. You are out of order. Please, her mic has been cut. Please escort her out. Thank you. Please escort her out.

(07:11:07)

Thank you. You are out of order. We both have a right. We both have a right to free speech.

(07:11:25)

Next. Next. All right, guys. It has been a long day, so...

(07:11:31)

My name is Christina Hansen. I was here not that long ago to talk to you guys, but I am here today as a Citi Bike member, as a pedestrian, as somebody who does not own a car. So I am not here for the car lobby as I was accused of being earlier. And as somebody who owns a horse, I spend my time in Central Park. But I rode a Citi Bike down here, so I am not anti-e-bike. I have been involved in an incident out here on the Hudson River Greenway with illegal class three e-bikes driven by children. Thankfully I was not hurt that bad. I walked away, told the kid you better get a helmet, and that an illegal bike should probably go back to school anyway.

Congratulations on your historic hearing. I am glad to see the City Council is interested in dealing with this problem. Congratulations to the e-bike advocates, because the fact that we are here now means that we are in the same place that we were a hundred, a hundred and twenty years ago with cars, because this is a new technology. It is taking over a city, and that could be a good thing. I mean, you know, that means that it is changing our culture, but with that comes the need for the ability to be regulated, to have licenses, insurance, accountability.

We are here hearing a historic 23 Bills and regulations. It should be 24 or 25, because none of those Bills matter if you cannot enforce them. I heard you guys frustrated today with the administration, asking them: are you enforcing the laws that we just passed this year, last year? And the answer is no. They do not know how. But the key here for safety is enforcement. You cannot enforce a lot of these laws unless you have a way to hold the operators of these new devices accountable. I heard wonderful testimony about how e-bikes are liberating people, but they stop short. So I think history can teach us a lot, but it is not complete unless we have the ability to enforce the laws we already have, and that includes Priscilla's Law or a resolution from the State, if it is the State that needs to...

(07:13:33)

Do it. Thank you very much.

(07:13:39)

Good evening, everyone. My name is Charlton. I am the president of Passages United and we are a nonprofit. What I am seeing all over the City, not only with delivery drivers but with regular Citi Bike riders on e-bikes, is they are going the wrong way, speeding down Broadway. They are not looking and many of them do not have helmets on. A Transportation Alternatives member told me they do not support helmets. Why is that?

So what I would say to you is that every bike rider in the City should be required to wear a helmet, have working lights. They should be required to wear safety vests. This is just common sense. You do not need legislation for this. Anyone with a brain can figure this out, and this is the problem in the City. Senior citizens are being hit by e-bikes outside of community services because they put the bus stop in the middle of a bike lane, and that is the problem.

I understand the delivery apps are forcing the drivers to rush and everything. But at the same time, there is a lot of corruption going on. We all know what is going on. The companies are giving you guys contributions and everyone is playing this game, and guess what, people are dying. What do you say to those families? Look at the thousands of victims in the hospitals. The bike crisis, the injuries — this is a major crisis throughout the City. ERs are full of victims being hit. God only knows, I could be hit tomorrow by an e-bike. I do not have health insurance. Who is going to pay for my health insurance? Look at these poor drivers...

(07:15:33)

Your speeches have been written by other people. That should be investigated. But anyway, have a good one. I am sure deliveries are more than capable. Next.

(07:15:50)

Hi. My name is Mary Ellen Vacchris. I just want to say that New York used to be a great city for pedestrians. It was a safe city to enjoy a leisurely stroll, whether in a park or on the sidewalk. This is no longer the case. E-vehicles have made walking hazardous for those individuals who like to walk, for those who need to walk to work or to school, et cetera. I cannot walk safely on the sidewalks or in the parks because there is no accountability for e-vehicle riders who consistently break the law. E-vehicle riders often ride through red lights, go in the wrong direction on one-way streets, ride on the sidewalks, ride on pedestrian paths in our parks and ride into crosswalks. When are we going to hold these riders accountable for their actions? I have had many close calls when I have almost been hit by an e-vehicle. As a...

(07:16:47)

...woman of a certain age, I can no longer dodge vehicles that commit infractions. I just do not move that fast any longer. Neither do the other elderly, disabled or very young New Yorkers that walk throughout our great City. One way to remedy this dangerous e-vehicle situation is to pass Priscilla's Law, Int 0800, which requires licensing and registration of e-vehicles. The riders of these vehicles must be held accountable for their actions. Red light cameras can catch the riders who commit infractions, and then we will begin to see riders who obey the law. Monetary fines change behavior. I urge City Council members to pass Int 0800 and Int 0377, which prohibits e-vehicles from our City parks. Thank you.

(07:17:45)

Thank you for your testimony. Next.

(07:17:50)

My name is Ellen Sandals and I live in Manhattan. For over four years, the Electric Safety Alliance has warned the City Council about the growing dangers on our streets and in parks from bikes and scooters ignoring traffic laws. Unfortunately, our pleas have been ignored, allowing this issue to escalate into a full-scale crisis. New Yorkers routinely face hostility, harassment and vulgar abuse from reckless riders simply for exercising our legal right of way. This degradation of civil discourse extends online. A few weeks ago, a participant on Nextdoor sent me a direct message featuring a large picture of his penis, along with the words, quote, "Granny, you need some biker dick. I am going to ride my loud bike to your home and pound your white ass," end quote. This hostile environment stems directly from the City Council's refusal to pass Priscilla's Law to hold riders accountable. Instead, your inaction has empowered a minority of entitled individuals who treat public spaces as their own, neglecting your duty to protect the majority of New Yorkers who walk our streets. The 20 or so proposed laws are political theater that fails to address the root of the problem...

(07:19:16)

...the reckless behavior of the riders themselves.

(07:19:20)

Why is protecting a minority of micro-mobility and Citi Bike riders treated as more important than the public safety of the pedestrians who are the majority? Stop ramming more poorly designed bike lanes down our throats. It is time to put public safety first and hold riders accountable. Shame on all of you if you continue to look the other way. Thank you. Next.

(07:19:52)

Hello. My name is Ronald Colangelo and I almost did not make it here today when an e-bike came towards me this way. So I sidestepped them and then behind me I heard screeching. It was another e-bike, there on the sidewalk. So what do you say? You smile. I did not get hurt. I listened to all these gentlemen explain about how hard it is for them to ride bikes and how they are harassed by policemen and how they get hit by cars. But not one of them talked about a policy. What happens if they do hit somebody? What is their policy? Do they stay at the scene? Do they call somebody? Or do they leave? None of that was discussed. So they want to talk about getting hurt, but if they hurt somebody, what do they do? What is their policy? You do not hear it.

(07:20:42)

So I was here with the first proof-of-concept meeting. A lot of you City Council members were not here. A lot of them that were here at that meeting are gone. So we are starting all over again.

(07:20:58)

And now we have all these other Bills from here, from there, from here, from there, and nothing gets passed. So we sit here and we listen. I was here at 9 o'clock. A lot of these people are a little older and they had to go home. From sitting here all day, the City Council members asked the officers that were here, the captains: what are you doing about this, what are you doing about that? And most of you were here. Most of these other people that were all banged up, that have pictures of them that you cannot believe what happened to them when they got hit by the bike. And you just say, how long is this process going to take? How many meetings do you have to come to before the City Council here takes action about anything?

(07:21:43)

And it is just sad. And I am very happy that you finally fixed the clock. I am glad the clock is working. And I will say that I appreciate your patience, or impatience. But you know, really, there have been a lot of folks here who have had to wait a long time and I appreciate the concerns and I appreciate the victims' aspect of the story as well. I appreciate your patience with us. The sergeants have an announcement to make, but just so you know, the next panel will be... we have a panel to bring up. At this time we will continue the hearing. Thank you. We will resume momentarily.

(07:22:37)

Hmm. We are still on that working check. Yeah, we are still here. There have been enough seats for everyone.

(07:22:59)

Check 1, 2. Check 1, 2.

(07:23:03)

Chair, we are ready to resume. All right, I am calling the next panel. La Boda... Fatty Holly... Barry or Bali... Joshua... Joshua Hussain or Sod Hussein, please. Boubacar Key — is that you? You already spoke. Okay. Alejandro... Hollis, come on up. Kamal, Kamal — do we know if he left or if he is coming back by any chance? Okay, got it. Thank you. Hakuba... Naheed Sarker... I think — oh, that is just... this is a smaller group here, but we will bring you up. Can you please add an additional chair? And please keep the music down. As much as I love that song, we have got to keep it down in here. Yes, yes. Thank you, Sergeant.

All right, I will begin from this side whenever you are ready. Thank you. My name is... and I am a delivery worker, and I am sharing my story today to request your support regarding an unjust deactivation that has...

(07:25:44)

...completely disrupted my livelihood. Recently, the app asked me to submit a photo verification. I complied immediately, uploading my profile photo within five minutes. Yet shortly after, my account was accused of having a duplicate account, specifically an Uber Eats account. This makes no sense because I do not have the license which is legally required to operate an Uber account. It is entirely unclear how a second account could even exist under my name, and I was given no fair way to defend myself or correct this error.

I have had these issues with my account and I have suffered many times, but they are telling me different reasons. For example, one representative once sent me information that my account was flagged for cancellation fraud. This makes the process even more complicated. When drivers try to resolve these issues, we are hit with a brick wall. Support is remote, far away and completely disconnected from the realities of our City. They do not know our local policies and in many cases they give incorrect advice that only drives us deeper into trouble rather than resolving anything.

As workers, we are deeply concerned about safety on the street. We want to protect our communities and follow traffic rules, but the reality is that we face immense pressures that make things difficult for everybody. We have to deal with traffic, unpredictable conditions and, above all, the constant grinding pressure from the companies pushing us to drive faster and harder. Thank you very much. Next.

(07:27:46)

Good afternoon. My name is Joshua Wood. I am a delivery worker with 10 years of experience across the industry and an organizer with the Workers Justice Project and Los Deliveristas Unidos. I am deeply concerned about some of these Bills. I am speaking both from my own perspective from working every day on a bicycle — just setting that record straight — and on behalf of over 150 of my comrades who have been waiting outside...

(07:28:05)

...today and were unable to be heard. The issues of safety that these Bills are meant to address do not come from the existence of delivery workers on e-bikes.

(07:28:15)

Making our streets safer requires a comprehensive approach built around dedicated infrastructure and regulation of the apps themselves.

(07:28:22)

During the pandemic we were hailed as heroes. It was during this time that the City legalized e-bikes, and as the workforce continued to grow under the new conditions created by the apps, e-bikes are now here to stay. What we need is more space to operate and dedicated micro-mobility lanes, pickup and resting areas. Every order being delivered by a class three bike is one not being delivered in a car or a truck, which are the real dangers on our streets and the source of congestion that we have to work around on a day-to-day basis.

We are a workforce who have adapted time and time again to increasing demand from apps that popped up in the City and gave us tasks to complete in a landscape that was not designed for us to safely operate in, but we found a way anyway. We hustle one order, a few dollars at a time, under intense pressure from oversight that is blind to the realities of the streets in front of us. It is not fair to the vast majority of workers who operate their bikes safely to retroactively ban their tools and place the burden on them for compliance with new rules. Even as a measure, Int 0095 fails to address the full scope of the micro-mobility and delivery industry and the logistical challenges required for a swap-back program to be fully comprehensive. Once these wheels get set in motion, every worker who is inevitably left out of the program will be punished.

(07:29:36)

These hinge on fair solutions for all workers who have already invested thousands of dollars into their vehicles. This means adapting the City's infrastructure to reflect what we as workers already know — that we can do our job safely. Thank you. We do not need to...

(07:29:48)

Thank you very much. Next. Hi. Good afternoon, Council Members. My name is Joe Dawson. I am from Queens, and I am currently a part-time delivery worker with Grubhub and a part-time yellow cab driver, which kind of gives me a very intimate idea about New York City streets. I have listened this entire morning for hours as you aggressively pushed for these e-bike crackdowns, and I have to ask: are you even thinking about the thousands of people whose livelihoods depend upon these streets?

Because whenever new laws are about to be passed or implemented, it is always at the expense of working class New Yorkers. I hear the heartbreaking testimonies of a lot of people, and I have heard the pedestrians who have suffered severe injuries, and my deepest sympathies and condolences to the people who have been hurt. But as Public Advocate Williams said, when he drives he hates bikers and pedestrians, when he bikes he hates pedestrians and drivers, and when someone is walking they hate bikers and drivers.

It is currently the infrastructure of New York that is pitting all of us against each other. So in my opinion, the real danger is our outdated infrastructure and a system that allows vehicles to become active death machines by actively turning into crosswalks while pedestrians are crossing, and by actively letting bikers go without a traffic signal when pedestrians are crossing. I think instead of fixing many of these root issues, you are letting the companies police our safety as delivery drivers, which should not be the case. I also feel the apps are rushing us with their algorithms and penalize us for being even a minute late. I heard the Uber representative say that Uber does not do that. But what about Grubhub? What about DoorDash? I do Grubhub, and I have a percentage that says how fast I delivered on time. Thank you. Thank you very much.

(07:31:58)

Next. Good afternoon. My name is Alejandra Charles, and I have been an app delivery worker for 10 years. I am also an organizer. We work at the Workers Justice Project. For the last 10 years I have worked for DoorDash, Grubhub and Uber Eats. I have delivered food, medicine and essential goods to New Yorkers through all kinds of weather, including during the pandemic and major storms when many people were told to stay home. I know what it means to be out there on these streets.

I am here because I oppose Int 0985-2026, Int 0986-2026 and Int 0989-2026. We are not criminals. We are workers supporting our families. More police enforcement and bike confiscation will not make our streets safer. We cannot leave workers' livelihoods in the hands of the corporations that created many of these problems. We oppose bills that would ban the bikes we depend on, increase police enforcement, or give delivery app companies the power to punish us. These policies could increase police interactions and give corporations more power to enforce rules against us. Any real safety solution that involves more policing, confiscation or deactivation will not make our work safer — only harder.

I have to ask: how can we trust the same companies that have exploited and mistreated us at every possible turn to keep us safe? DoorDash recently agreed to pay one $31 million settlement after acknowledging that they had indeed stolen money from delivery workers by withholding our pay and failing to comply with New York City's minimum pay rules. Yet somehow, Council Members are putting our safety as workers in the hands of these greedy corporations. Thank you very much.

(07:34:06)

Thank you. Next. Good afternoon. My name is Yaya Coulibaly. I have been a delivery worker for three years and a member of the Workers Justice Project. Like all delivery workers, we are under constant pressure from apps to meet strict pickup and delivery time windows, while navigating traffic and red lights. This pressure can force workers to choose between following traffic laws and protecting our income. Companies need to give us more time so we can follow traffic laws safely. Thank you. Thank you for your...

(07:35:42)

testimony. This panel is excused.

(07:35:46)

Next up we have Trey Laurie, Mohammed, John Alexander Bravo, Bah Abdoulaye. So far, how many folks that I have called on are here? Is that one so far? Farouk, Abdul Bah, Kylie Pino or Michael Pino, Solar Mainzel. All right, and we have space for one more. Fear? No. Bah! Wow! There are no balls... not here. Is that correct? Brando Rodriguez? Brando Rodriguez? Fear? No. Barry? Yeah. Mohammed Ramen. Mohammed Abu Hashem. All right, I will start off with you. Remember to say your name before you begin. Thank you.

(07:38:40)

Going up... My name is Mohamed El... Sorry. You can start over again. Let us keep it quiet in here. Can you please start his time again? I want to be able to hear you clearly. Thank you.

(07:38:57)

Begin. Good afternoon.

(07:39:00)

My name is... and I have worked as a delivery driver in New York City for almost three years. I am also a member of the... I have worked for Grubhub for nearly one year. I am here to share my concern about the bills included in Int 0985-2026, Int 0986-2026, Int 0989-2026 and Int 0986-2026. We have suffered efforts to improve working conditions in food delivery, but I would also want to make sure that new policies do not create additional burdens for workers. We depend on delivery for our livelihood, and delivery companies give us very little time to pick up and deliver orders, and this pressure can force drivers to rush. One day I was working in a bike lane and a car door opened and hit me.

(07:41:08)

...in Bangla, like Bangladesh...

(07:41:15)

Can we give him another minute? Okay, cool. Can we please add another minute? If you can interpret, that would be great.

(07:41:24)

After... I mean, I am ready. Every Bangladesh...

(07:41:28)

I am making the offer so that he can share his experience in Bangla if he would like, you know.

(07:41:43)

...multiple different... Can we add one more minute to the clock?

(07:41:58)

...I want to say something about delivery... I have an idea about what it means to be an economic... friends and teammates.

(07:42:18)

I am going to... and I want... and I did.

(07:42:30)

Wow. All right. Thank you. Thank you so much for your testimony. I appreciate you sharing that. Next. Sorry, my English is... Nobody wants to speak French? You can speak in any language you like. Please.

(07:42:50)

Bonsoir. My name is Manziel... I am a delivery worker in New York. I am here today for the first time to speak about Int 0985-2026 and Int 0986-2026. We have set a... The city has confronted us and the police have come to take control. There is no value in this proposal. For us, the electric bike... the responsibility is not security. Because without delivering, there are no deliveries, and we want peace.

(07:44:18)

...protest... about the stage... protection against... they do not want it. We... move along, move along... the problem... some confronted... I said, could you...

(07:44:58)

Thank you. Next.

(07:44:59)

I can translate if you... Sorry, I can translate if you want. We can send a copy. We do not need translation. We will make sure that everyone is getting, you know, his video, and we have heard multiple testimonies with similar content, so I think we are okay with that. We appreciate that anyone can testify in the language that they prefer. I would like to say that, by the way.

(07:45:27)

Yes. Good evening, everybody. My name is... and I work as a delivery worker in New York City. I am here today to express my opposition to Int 0985-2026, Int 0986-2026 and Int 0989-2026. I also want to share my concern about the city's approach to the problems delivery workers face every day on our streets. Instead of addressing the issues we face, the city is considering sending the police to give us more tickets and take away our bikes. This proposal could also make legal bikes and put delivery apps in charge of our safety. We all know that delivery apps do not care about us. We need more protected bike lanes. We need more secure bike parking. We need stronger protections against deactivation. We care about security. We want safer streets too. But this bill will not solve the problems we face every day or make delivery workers' lives better. Improve our streets and make New York City safer for everyone. Thank you. Thank you.

(07:46:54)

Next. Good afternoon. Yeah. Okay. Thanks.

(07:47:00)

My name is Abdul Samad Coulibaly. I am from Guinea. I am a delivery worker in New York City. I am here today to express my opposition to Int 0985-2026, Int 0986-2026 and Int 0989-2026. I would also like to express my concern about how the city should respond to the problems that delivery workers face every day on our streets.

The reason delivery people speed is not because we want to drive too fast. It is because of the applications. If you cannot estimate and deliver on time for DoorDash, Grubhub and other applications, your account will be deactivated. They always tell you that you are late. The reason why people want to go fast is not the delivery workers — it is the applications that are driving all of this. They can give us a delivery from Manhattan to Long Island and we cannot work all that out for maybe $10 or $15. It is difficult for us because we have rent to pay and we have families. And on top of that, customers message us and tell us to come quickly because if their food gets cold, they will leave a bad review on our application. That is why we drive fast, and the apps will not change that. Thank you.

(07:49:09)

Thank you.

(07:49:10)

...thank you. Not Camacho... a Latino... a corporation... international control... in front... America... a campaign... international control... I do not have to... complicated story... corporation... no record... work... in Australia... the internet... a lot... reprehensible... a problem... problematic... according to... more... because of... reprehensible... not persecution... the economy... internal application... corporate... media reported... a million... economic... okay... on piano solo... ordinary... from the vehicle... CEO... the metro... in front of... Frisco. Yes.

(07:51:12)

Let us also add another member of the public who would like to address this panel. Omar Farouk, are you here? I thought I was told you were back. So can we add a chair for him, please? And then we will have them... then we will excuse the panel.

(07:51:52)

All right, Omar, you can testify. Hello. Can I talk in my language? Yes, you can, of course. Always. Okay. As-salamu alaykum. Wa alaykum assalam. There was a good delivery career... I am studying... for the camera... that was... the camera... they want... my money... the company... and other because they have a hard time... a lot of money... I am not... the company... going to ask... camera... diminished... okay... I want... some of the cash tomorrow... I am totally going to... fundamentally... monitored... from... a minute... traditionally... a minute... for... violation... between my shop... all of them... the money...

(07:53:50)

...Bangladesh... I do not know what... listen. So, about what happened with my testimony... I am referring... would you need... Washington... then I thank you. I am a person... I should not... I am of Bangladeshi descent. This is an issue that is deeply personal to me. A lot of Bangladeshis are in this workforce and are currently really at risk on the job. I want to better understand how much you have paid for your devices, how many tickets you have gotten from the NYPD. The brother here described being deactivated out of work for three months. So I am asking... another biker... investment... the biker... do not know... biker...

(07:54:40)

...helped... I have... okay. $2,000 NYPD ticket... quite a ticket... the dollar amount... how many... tickets... what is recorded... ticket... how much... I should allow that... deactivated... appeal... obligated... the activity... ticket... I have been... record... order to... appeal... account... okay... I cannot always... I do not know. Yeah, this is... deactivation... about... okay... director... he often... this... I do not know what I... naturally... a good reason... I did about this... he... does not... they are going to organize. They are going to want... able to look... created... but they live in... 11, 12%... keep... when our... for the table. I am... from... able to say... I do not know... from... I am... this is... of the family... from the right. I am going to go...

(07:56:37)

Time. I will let you finish what you know. Hello. Advance notice...

(07:56:43)

I can... advanced... only then can appeal, right? All right. Just so everyone knows, this entire hearing will be translated into English for those who would like to know what was discussed today by folks who do not speak the language. I am sorry. So... I do not know... the company... like many... proof. I am going to get to prove... the only one, though, is one that does not... but maximum work... where you can... the activation... on... a cannibal... sidelined... prove us again because of... and they are going to be considered a reflection... a minor. Thank you very much. This panel is excused. All right.

(07:57:43)

All right. I am calling up the next panel now. Corey Hannigan, Paul Mondesir, Brian Chin, Stephanie Russell-Craft. Let us see how many folks are here so far. Let me mention that again. Corey Hannigan, Paul Mondesir, Brian Chin, Stephanie Russell-Craft.

(07:58:06)

Robertson... Celeste Brown... we have space for a few more.

(07:58:24)

Saul Laken. All right. Are you sitting down? All right. You can begin, Corey, right? Yeah. All right.

(07:58:45)

Thanks, Majority Leader. Good evening. My name is Corey Hannigan. I am the Policy Director at Transition Alternatives. I am also a resident of Sunnyside, Queens, and I am a member of the Queens... Today I am actually testifying as an individual. I care deeply about safety and I have spent years advocating alongside families for safe streets both in New Jersey and New York. Legal, low-speed bikes have been a revelation for me and many others in my neighborhood, where it can take twice as long to get to nearby upper Manhattan by transit than by bike, but where steep bridges make conventional bikes physically challenging. My own partner has only started joining me thanks to the availability of electric City Bikes. It has enabled more spontaneous trips together to see friends in nearby neighborhoods and more chance encounters with our neighbors.

It is important to recognize that legal, low-speed bikes have killed none of the nearly 150 New Yorkers killed on our streets this year, and yet much of this nearly 30-bill hearing is focused exclusively on the most... Most people are killed by high-speed motor vehicle drivers. There have been 45 hit-and-runs so far this year, as well as by non-street-legal, high-speed devices that exceed 25 miles an hour, which were involved in both the fatal crashes on the Queensboro Bridge and right here on Chambers Street, and which are often purposefully mislabeled as legal bikes. These are the machines that put us all — pedestrians and bike riders alike — at risk. Licensing low-speed bikes will not work. Restricting access to legal e-bikes will only push more people to choose these faster, heavier options. By making the safer option harder to get, it will disproportionately impact immigrant workers. It will do nothing to meaningfully improve safety. I urge you to focus on the data, focus on infrastructure, and address the real problem. Thank you very much for your time.

(08:00:31)

Thank you for your testimony. Next.

(08:00:36)

Good evening. My name is Stephanie Russell-Craft and I am a single mom of two living in Crown Heights, Brooklyn. I use an e-bike. It is convenient, affordable, environmentally friendly, and it is what I use to take my kids to school, to get groceries, to visit my friends, to go on play dates at Prospect Park. I am also a frequent pedestrian, as most of us are in this city. I am very concerned about street safety as a mom, as an e-biker and as a pedestrian, and also just as a New Yorker. I often feel unsafe when illegal throttle e-motos are on the street.

I also know that a lot of families like mine depend on bikes as a primary mode of transportation. I would not be able to shuttle my kids, who weigh more than a hundred pounds combined, without the pedal-assist feature. E-bikes are a wonderful tool for micro-mobility and we need to make sure they are operated safely on our streets. But there is a difference between the low-speed pedal-assist e-bikes that I use and the e-motos that are marketed as safe but are, you know, kind of watered-down motorcycles. I think we should end the deceptive advertising of high-speed illegal devices as safe and legal and ban them at the point of sale.

I also want to reiterate what many people have said today: what makes me fear for my life the most on the streets is motor vehicles and trucks that at least once a month threaten to run me off the road. I also want to acknowledge the many service workers that depend on bikes and want to make sure that if we do change policies, there is a safe and just transition to help them travel on safe bikes while keeping their livelihoods intact. We should not punish delivery workers we all depend on to make the City run, and we need to hold corporations accountable for incentivizing dangerous e-bike riding by putting profits over worker safety. Thank you.

(08:02:35)

Next up.

(08:02:35)

Good evening. My name is Jess Brown and I have the joy of leading social impact work for Veo, one of New York City's shared micro-mobility providers. Although much of today's conversation is around privately owned vehicles, it is important to speak to the fact that the City's shared micro-mobility programs are highly regulated and offer communities a safe and affordable way to use micro-mobility. We have enforced speed limits and geofences, required parking rules, age verification and beginner mode restrictions, incident reporting requirements, professionally maintained and continuously inspected fleets, and direct accountability to the City by way of the Department of Transportation, which we heard from earlier today.

We launched in New York understanding the City's deep commitment to Vision Zero, and safety has been central since day one. We are proud partners in delivering some of the most intensive shared micro-mobility safety regulations in the country, including three mandatory beginner mode trips at a reduced speed of 10 miles per hour with no riding after dark, as well as strict verification. Our commitment to Vision Zero extends beyond the requirements of our program, having supported the City's dusk and darkness safety campaign, and we are proud to continually sponsor the Vision Zero Conference each year as part of our continued

(08:03:42)

commitment to making New York City streets safer for everyone. And that matters because, for many New Yorkers as you have heard today, micro-mobility is a necessity. In our most recent rider survey, we learned that half of our riders do not own or have access to cars, 60% of our riders make under $50,000 a year, and one out of every three riders are using Veo to connect to transit or reach places that transit does not serve. Our ridership speaks to how shared micro-mobility is essential for affordable transportation in the City today.

Participants in our low-income program, Veo Access, have taken over 250,000 rides in Queens and the Bronx, our current service areas, and our riders tell us what that access means: reaching the train faster, getting to the grocery store and medical appointments, and simply being able to move around their own neighborhoods. As the industry's leader in accessible vehicle design, we prioritize designing and improving our vehicles alongside our communities, and with nearly one out of every four riders self-reporting a disability...

(08:04:38)

I will submit the rest. Thank you very much. Thank you. Next is...

(08:04:47)

Good evening. My name is Drew Robertson. I am the President of Atlantic Systems. I am a transportation policy practitioner and our firm is in transportation. Further, I am a biker. I have biked in New York since the 1970s. I live in Midtown East and I use the Queensboro Bridge at least once a week to walk or to bike, so I am very familiar with the micro-mobility safety crisis that we no longer have the tools to manage. Every day, 400,000 delivery bike trips move across our City. Since 2019, there have been 17,000 New Yorkers injured by e-bikes and 133 dead.

These are not isolated incidents. They are predictable results of an operating system without adequate infrastructure, enforcement or accountability. Delivery workers — overwhelmingly lower-income immigrants — bear the greatest harm. Their injuries outnumber pedestrians' by five to one. They are not the problem. They are the people absorbing the consequences of a business model that rewards speed, penalizes delay and externalizes risk onto workers and the public.

The City has taken meaningful steps: battery requirements, worker training and the Department of Sustainable Delivery. The bills before the Council today add to those measures. However, these efforts share a single structural limitation: there is no dedicated funding source tied to the delivery economy, even though it is generating enormous traffic volumes on our streets and revenues for the platforms. What I urge the Council to do is adopt a delivery safety surcharge of $1 for every third-party food delivery order. This revenue should be dedicated in a ring-fenced micro-mobility infrastructure fund. At current volumes, that would be $146 million a year. Well, I have... Thank

(08:06:50)

you so much for your testimony. I want to let members of the public know that there is a Hispanic Heritage celebration event taking place, so we will hear some noise. Our apologies in advance. Next.

(08:07:07)

Good evening. My name is Saul Lincoln. I am the Head of Product for Alzo, which is a micro-mobility spin-off from the electric vehicle company Canoo. At Alzo, we follow any and all applicable laws. We do not allow users to unlock their devices via an app or by clipping a little red wire on their bike. The software-defined and connected nature of our products allows us to remain compliant in a changing regulatory environment, even when we do not agree with the policies. We do support bills that hold commercial users and dispatchers accountable, just as those laws we have on the books for commercial users of cars and trucks.

The fact is, when different road users are trying to occupy the same space at different speeds, the conditions for traffic violence are present. Therefore, we support the notion that 20 is plenty, if and only if it applies across all road users, including cars and trucks. The legislation that is not being heard today is what would most help provide New York City the tools needed to address these challenges. No, it is not Priscilla's Law, but it is time for New York State and New York City to work together to harmonize their bike definitions, classification and usage regulations with the vast majority of the United States of America.

New York City's unique definition of a Class 3 e-bike not only violates federal regulations, but it rolled out the red carpet for unsafe riding behavior above 20 miles an hour via throttle, and for the horrible battery fires that have plagued the five boroughs. The discrepancy in New York law compared to the rest of the market makes the quality e-bike industry — like my company — essentially unable to operate in this city, leaving irresponsible brands to fill the gap in the market with unsafe and illegal products. I want to close by painting a personal picture that you have not seen today. I cannot help but notice that everyone who has testified about being a victim of micro-mobility has been, shall we say, on the upper end of the age spectrum. My 82-year-old father is a proud resident of Brooklyn. He rides every day.

(08:09:16)

Thank him, please. Submit your written testimony for the Committee to read. This panel is excused. Next up we have Rachel Spielman, Carol..., Batra, Julie Harvey, Jari Newsome, Kate Cole, Alan Gamboa. I believe we have space for one more. I would like to recognize Council Member... for joining us. All right. I think I have space for one more, so give us one more second. Is Carol Ferrante here? I may be mispronouncing your name. My apologies. But there is no Carol here. Last name starts with the letter S. All right. Bill Bruno — all right, come on down. All right, Bill, we will begin with you. Thank you.

(08:10:55)

I am Bill... from Jackson Heights. I am a cyclist, subway rider and a pedestrian. My approach is that there are three guiding principles that should cover all of these. The first: infrastructure before regulation. I would have liked to see more infrastructure here, but at least the task force fills me with some hope. We know that bike lanes and better infrastructure save lives.

Secondly, size and speed matter. Mass and velocity define the risk categories by which we set rules, and different risk categories should not have identical regulatory regimes. That is why we have separate rules for cars and bikes. It is why the "20 is plenty" rule matters so much, and we should not treat things that go faster than 20 the same as things that go more slowly than 20. That is why rules such as Int 0244-2026 and Int 0988-2026 are so effective and important. We should separate the Class 3 e-bikes and the e-motos from the Class 1 and 2 e-bikes and subject those to a separate regulatory regime.

Finally, for enforcement, the golden rule should be to punch up and not punch down. I am gratified to see that so many of the categories are covering delivery companies, apps and bike stores. The apps have the power relative to delivery workers. When you think about it, there are stores out there in my neck of the woods that sell e-motos and label them as quote-unquote e-bikes. They have the knowledge base regarding registration and regarding the technical aspects that a lot of buyers do not, so it is more appropriate to regulate them. Finally, when there is street enforcement, limit subjectivity. Cameras are good, but also monitor them. That is why I like Int 0787-2026, where you are monitoring police activities. And that is it. Thank you.

(08:12:55)

Thank you. Next.

(08:13:00)

You can catch your breath. Here we go. Okay. Good evening, Council. My name is AJ and I live near Forest Hills, Queens. I am not a delivery rider. I am not a representative of any agency. I am

(08:13:13)

just a regular person who uses an e-scooter to commute to my office job in Manhattan. Many micro-mobility users prefer scooters over e-bikes for their compact size and affordability. I have also benefited from quick commutes to Brooklyn spanning half an hour on average, whereas a subway would take an hour or longer since you often go through Manhattan first.

I cannot overstress how my e-scooter has enhanced my quality of life in this city, but I must raise two issues today. First, around accessibility and ownership of e-scooters, and second, around bike lane infrastructure. First, even legal micro-mobility devices are still not accessible to the majority of our City if they cannot even be kept anywhere. Most apartment complexes and co-op buildings prohibit all e-scooters and bikes from storage or charging on the premises. These blanket bans do not factor in that it is possible for a personal electric vehicle to meet safety and compliance standards around charging when they contain UL-certified batteries within their life cycle. Buildings do not always consider the distinction between illegal and legal devices. So this either prohibits people from benefiting from what micro-mobility has to offer, or forces them onto shared services like Citi Bike, which is owned by Lyft and netted them $24 million in profits last year.

I hope to see legislation introduced that would allow riders more options to safely store legal e-scooters and bikes for their own accessibility, just as electric cars are allowed in parking garages — yes, even parking garages that currently ban them. Have your batteries inspected and swapped at end of cycle. The second issue I must raise: I am short on time, but basically, please consider concrete barriers for bike lanes, because cars drive into them and pedestrians sometimes walk into them when they should be just for us.

(08:15:05)

Thank you. Next.

(08:15:08)

Yes, this is Kate Coley and I am an advocate for the handicapped. However, at this point I am so stressed by the fact that we have a law or a rule set by the previous Mayor Adams and Citi Bike — we were supposed to go 15 miles an hour —

(08:15:40)

and here we are saying 20 is good. No, no. I think I want to go with 15. You know, all the studies have been done — 20 is too fast. And the infrastructure that I see on the avenues is amazing. People go in the wrong direction. This is Manhattan, and you know, people stop. But on the streets they have shared lanes, and those little plastic things that stick up — they do not protect the meat packets that we are. And if we could move one of the lanes of parked traffic on the streets so that there could be a path just for bikers, so they do not have to go up on the sidewalk, and they have a place to park and to do the deliveries — that would be marvelous. Thank you very much.

(08:16:56)

Thank you. Next up.

(08:17:00)

Good evening, City Council. My name is Jerry. I am the developer of our... a safe recycling map. To begin, I would like to say something I have never said in a government building before: I am so happy to be here. We are very happy to have you — seriously. Thank you. Because let me tell you, I just got back from L.A. and the transit is so bad over there that even robots have to drive. But when I found out that the City Council is considering banning Class 3 e-bikes, I thought I was being trolled. I thought that was only something that would happen in Florida. Can you all see the headline: "Florida City Bans Bikes Because They Go Too Fast for Equality"? But then I saw the legislation and I realized — you all are serious. So I came down here.

Is New York City ready to be a city where an adult with a license can rent or buy a Cybertruck, but not a Class 3 bike? Would you rather see me in a Hummer than on a Class 3? Why is it that these vehicles designed for military use — these vehicles that weigh tons, damaging our bridges — are allowed on roads, but a Class 3 bike that weighs around 75 pounds or less and tops out at 25 miles per hour is not?

I cannot support Int 0244-2026 or T2026-2361 because I worry that it furthers inequity in this city and it takes away a tool for addressing the climate crisis in our City. If you all want to improve infrastructure, build a protected and connected network of bike lanes, build fast and free bus lanes throughout the City, build wider sidewalks and call it a glide-away, so that no matter what method of transit New Yorkers use, they can glide to their destination safely.

(08:18:58)

Thank you. Thank you very much. And I encourage you to come to the October 27th hearing where we will talk about the dangers posed by...

(08:19:09)

Cars. Next. Hello. My name is Alan. I am a district leader and community board member from Bushwick. I have lived in New York City for over 20 years and I have been hit by cars six times: twice on a bicycle, three times on a moped and once on foot. On all of these occasions I was moving defensively, cautiously and in full compliance with the law. Most recently on June 1, I was struck while riding my moped by a driver who decided to make a U-turn from the curb side without checking that the street was clear. I fractured five ribs and my clavicle and tore the labral muscle in my shoulder — injuries I am still recovering from. I accept these risks, though I should not have to, because I believe a better world is possible. But I am feeling a massive disconnect here.

A lot of the talk that I am hearing today — replace the word "bike" with "car" and I agree with everything Council Member Paladino said earlier. Car companies have taken over and cars are causing carnage on our streets. To some, this car violence is invisible, or must just feel like a big, inevitable ingredient of modern life. But it does not have to be that way. New York City existed for hundreds of years before cars and we will exist for hundreds of years after cars, inshallah.

But there is no safe way to drive. Every car on the road reduces the freedom, health and safety of everyone around it. Cars directly cause one million deaths around the world each year, including 45,000 Americans — which is the same as guns. In New York City, cars kill around 250 people and injure tens of thousands just directly by driving. And this is not even including the vast destruction from air pollution, climate change and wars for oil and empire, like what is happening in Iran right now. When is the hearing for the car crisis? Where is this energy for provisions toward eliminating all the violence caused by cars?

I believe it is a misuse of limited time and resources to be focusing this disproportionately on the road users that are causing a tiny percentage of the crashes. We are just tinkering around the edges with things like bike registration, which are not going to result in safer streets. We know what results in safer streets. That is better road design. That is bike lanes. That is a 20 mile per hour speed limit. And thank you for...

(08:21:11)

Your time? No, thank you. And as I mentioned earlier, we noticed the hearing this morning for October 27 to talk about the City's Vision Zero initiative, so I am expecting to see you there too. All right, this panel is excused. All right, we have Ed Khousabian, Alison Valentine, Antonio Rosario, Rangelica Saavedra. All right. How many folks do we have here so far? All right. Going to call up more names. Corey Fu, Zia Karen, food from... my apologies. Alex Gregor. This is James Burke, 3349692 Street. Shorish Walled, one L Street. Janet... Erik Richardson, Jo Seong Chi, Michael Reilly. Okay. Is that you? All right. I have space for one more. Alex Barrett, come on up. As friends, you can speak in French. Okay. When... but I think I am going to start off with the...

(08:23:27)

...person to your left first. And again, as a reminder, folks can speak in whatever language they choose. The testimonies will all be translated to English. Beginning with you.

(08:23:44)

...

(08:24:36)

...

(08:24:40)

...

(08:25:18)

...

(08:26:09)

...Next. The map in Bremen — he has traveled from Libya to New York.

(08:26:24)

...

(08:26:31)

...

(08:26:58)

...

(08:27:29)

...

(08:27:36)

...Thank you. Next.

(08:28:26)

Good evening. My name is Antonio Rosario. I am a lifelong New Yorker, born in the Bronx, raised in Brooklyn. And yes, I waited my whole life to watch the New York Knicks win a championship. I am here today to stand in solidarity with the delivery workers. These workers are delivery workers just like many of us. They are out on the streets every day working hard to serve our communities and put food on the table for their families.

There is something important to recognize. Many of these are immigrant workers. They came here looking for an opportunity to work, provide for their families and build a better life. They should not be forced to pay a financial price for the problems they did not create. We also need to recognize that companies like Uber, DoorDash and Amazon have something in common: they continue to pit workers and communities against one another while getting rich from the problems their growth has helped create. They shift the blame onto workers instead of taking responsibility for the systems they built and the infrastructure problems that they have created. We should be careful about solutions that bring these workers more interactions with the police. The answer to a problem affecting working people should not automatically be more policing of working people.

We need to listen to the workers themselves. We need to stand with them and most importantly we need to work with them to find solutions that actually work for the people out there doing the job every day. I know firsthand how corporations find ways to exploit workers. I have spent 32 years as a Teamster. I have seen how companies change the rules, reorganize work and put more pressure on workers while trying to make more money. That is why solidarity matters — whether you are driving a package car, delivering food on a bike, working in a warehouse or making deliveries anywhere in our economy. We are all workers. When one group of workers is pushed down, it affects all of us.

So today I am asking you to listen to the delivery workers, stand with them and work with them. The people who do the work every day must have the power to shape the decisions that determine their lives and livelihoods — not just a seat at the table, but a real voice and a real say. Thank you.

(08:30:30)

Thank you. He deserves a self-clap.

(08:30:36)

Next. My name is Joe... I have been a cyclist since I was five years old. I have been a commuter cyclist since I was 18 and I have been working as a delivery worker as a cyclist for the last 40 years. What I have seen in the last decade and a half is the evolution of the bike. I remember when it was just one guy who sped right by me — I did not even hear him. And now these bikes have evolved and become monster machines. They are super speeders. A lot of these bikes have two batteries. Even the so-called legal bikes — Class 3 vehicles — there are 25 of them used by old delivery workers. The thing is, why are they not responsible for their own actions? Why are you putting the onus on the delivery company instead of the ones who made the decisions to buy these bikes and to break the laws with them?

In fact, the Department of Transportation and Transportation Alternatives could basically do my testimony for me, because they redesigned the streets for delivery workers' illegal behaviors. They run red lights, they go the wrong way, and the thing is that they made the infrastructure — the bike lanes — to legalize wrong-way bike riding. They widened the bike lanes to accommodate the speed. So in other words, the people responsible for making the streets more dangerous are the delivery workers who choose to speed and break the laws, and the government for enabling that behavior.

And the thing is, all bikes — every e-bike — there is no distinction. They all have motors. They are all motor vehicles and they should be regulated like cars. They all go fast, and 20 miles per hour is not just nothing — 20 can still kill a person. The thing is, all these bills — 20 bills — they are relevant, but the thing is... thank you. Best.

(08:32:43)

Thank you for your testimony. Next name...

(08:32:57)

...is Michael Riley. I live in District 9 and I commute to your district in the morning where I bicycle. I biked down here today. I shaved my beard the other day, so I am not one of those bearded guys. But I am a volunteer cyclist, unpaid, and I want to thank you, Chair, and the Council Members who are here and all the staff and the sergeants at arms and everyone who testified before. Thank you for this opportunity.

I am in strong favor of Int 0244-2026 from CM Hudson, Int 0988-2026 from you, Int 0985-2026 from CM Abreu and Int 0950-2026 from CM... I am in favor of a slow, thoughtful rollout of regulations on micro-mobility vehicles. I feel that we lost an opportunity six years ago...

(08:33:53)

...whenever it was, when these sweeping regulations came in to approve e-bicycles, e-bikes, mopeds and scooters. You know, we began the conversation today with the sad, tragic death of the person just outside of City Hall here a few weeks ago. And I heard it was referred to as an e-bike, when that person was on essentially a motorcycle that just happens to be electric. So I think that we need to carefully look at all of these classifications and allow for our citizens who do have transportation issues and need electrical assistance.

I pedaled here. I pedaled 7.65 miles, averaging about 10 miles per hour, and I pedal every day, more or less, 200 to 300 days a year. Only extreme snow and ice will keep me off the roads. But I do feel that we need to carefully regulate the electronic vehicles. I also believe, and it has just been addressed in the last couple of minutes here, that we really need to look at the bigger picture. The people who were hit by e-bikes and mopeds and various things testified here because they were not hit by cars. Thank you.

(08:35:03)

For your testimony. This panel is excused. Ali Barry. Yes. Arnold Handler. The panels are a little mixed now. Daniel... okay, who is Barry? Going to testify already? Yes, she is. Far right? Yep. Mohammed Ramen — I think we tried saying that earlier too. Mohammed Ramen. H-M-A-N. Just... all right. Mamadou Boyd Diallo. And... oh, sure, sure. Alfredo Palmer. Okay. Mamadou Barry. Mamadou Barry not here, right? Okay. MD Farook. Omar Farook already went, right? Okay. MD Islam. Oh, all right, we have space for one more in this panel. L'Hadj Diallo. L'Hadj. Yeah, it is so hot here. Okay. Mamadou Talib. Am I pronouncing this correct? Okay. Mohammed... Hossein.

And by the way, I recognize that there have been a lot of workers that have joined us today that probably had to go back to work, which we understand. I know that they had a job and hours. I want to say I am grateful that you were able to come by today, even though a lot of your members were not able to testify. I am very grateful that you are here.

Cheikh Ndiaye. Yes. C-H-E-I? Yes. Cheikh... so Ibrahim Diallo — this person, we believe this name already testified, but I think we had it in here twice. Just want to make sure. There is not another person? The same thing. Okay. Ibrahim... yeah, I know. We have noticed that today there are a lot of people in the room. Ibrahim Diallo. Okay. Mamadou Diallo. Mamadou Thiam. All right. Abdoulaye! All right. Sorry, sorry. All right, I think we have a panel. All right. We begin with you. And again, to remind the panel, you can speak whatever language you prefer.

(08:40:47)

Of course. It does not matter. I am...

(08:40:54)

Good. Ready. We are ready.

(08:41:00)

Yeah. Hi. My name is Alfa Bar and I am a delivery worker in New York City and a member of Los Deliveristas Unidos. I am here in this testimony to say how easily our company can destroy our workers' lives and livelihoods with a single automatic click. And why we discussed with really near real protection — and indeed constant heart — and our politicians on our streets. On a Sunday I accepted an order, but the box was simply too big to fit inside my car. I canceled the order without calling customer support to notify them of the volume issue. Unfortunately, that same day I received three consecutive large orders from the same Home Depot. Because my car is small, none of them fit and I had no choice but to cancel all of them. After that, no more delivery orders were sent to me and I ended my session. The next day I woke up, checked my phone and discovered I had been completely deactivated.

I was doing a good job, constantly working and trying to comply with city regulations and traffic rules. When they are going to flag us, we have no real protections. Against accusations we can appeal, but our cases are handled by an automatic system that will never give us a fair chance or a break to prove our innocence. We do not know what we did wrong enough to receive... we face profiling and constant surveillance. Thank you very...

(08:43:07)

...much. Next. You can stay seated. Thank you.

(08:43:17)

Hello. I will take some French, but I am going to speak in English and read in English. My name is Barry Mamadou, a delivery worker. I am going to talk about three things: prevention, politics and business.

I was told that prevention is better than cure. I find it striking that policymakers have chosen to focus on problems concerning certain citizen viewers — an issue regarding a specific group, the delivery workers — while turning a blind eye to other vehicle drivers, app users and the app owners themselves, especially the main actors. We delivery workers are in a difficult situation that sometimes I tear up looking at. We are vulnerable. We can easily lose our lives because if a car hits us or we hit a car, we are the ones who bear the impact. We have children and families relying on us for survival. We risk our lives in the cold and the heat, regardless of the weather, to survive and serve the citizens. And we are also taxpayers, while paying our own taxes with our hard-earned money. We pay for the bikes that serve as our livelihood. I said depending on the apps to confiscate them is effectively punishing us.

It is a core issue. Without prevention, business — they say the customer is king. In the concept I studied at school, the apps set strict time limits for food delivery, penalizing those who miss them, with penalties potentially even including deactivation from the app. They show no concern for the delivery worker's life, for the pedestrian on the street who might be struck by a worker under extreme pressure. They disregard the risk of bike confiscation or policy fines and penalties that can paralyze the livelihood of many workers. It is all about money and the customers. Thank you so much.

(08:45:18)

Thank you. Next. Sorry...

(08:45:24)

Good evening. My name is Roxanne Delgado. I reside in the Bronx, near Pelham Parkway. I am a founder of Friends of Pelham Parkway. I would like to say that I was here since quarter to ten a.m. And the fact is that I did hear a Council member state that she wished she had a separate hearing from e-scooters and parks. That is a large issue going on in our parks regarding e-scooters. It was introduced to the Pelham Parkway and the east side of the Bronx in 2021. It has not replaced cars. What has replaced it is walking and cycling, and it has underage children of our community growing up riding them and not only endangering themselves but endangering the pedestrians and cyclists and people who are trying to enjoy Pelham Parkway. Pelham Park has been a sanctuary for us during COVID-19. During the heat wave it has been a refuge for people. Pelham Park has a large immigrant population of Mexicans, Dominicans, Albanians, Asians and people from the Middle East. So if they are the breadwinner not only for the family that resides with them but for families overseas, most of them do not have health care. So if they are injured by an e-scooter, then not only would they be impacted but the people that rely on them would also be impacted. I say this because I know and understand people who ride e-scooters. I would like to say that the local precinct cannot enforce anything. They cannot enforce e-scooters.

Why do we have public space given to corporations who do not even pay for the use of our public spaces and endanger us? There have been injuries, but

(08:47:02)

NYPD does not collect the data needed on this. They are not licensed, and in most instances in the hospitals, Jacobi and North Central Bronx Hospital, they say a lot of injuries result from scooter incidents. At local precinct meetings, Council meetings, the most top complaints are noise complaints and e-scooters. They impact our quality of life and enjoyment of our parks. So I hope you are really looking into this. Thank you very much.

(08:47:27)

Next. Thank you. Hello. My name... do you want to start his time over again? Sorry about that.

(08:48:15)

I am a delivery worker here in New York City. The delivery companies treat us like machines. They do not care about our safety. We need the Council, CM Hanif and others, to care about us. We need protection. The delivery companies do not provide good service to us. They only care about delivery speed, not about the delivery workers. Other people sometimes know the dangerous issues, and I want to say the delivery worker is not the problem. The company has to provide good service. Thank you.

(08:50:01)

Thank you very much. Next. Hello. Good evening. I am Mohammed Hussein. I have been delivering in New York City for more than seven years. I woke up early this morning to come here to share my experience of my delivery life, but a lot of the time I could not share everything. I want to say a lot of things, but I see my senior citizen community come here and they bring a lot of pictures and they show their buildings, but they do not feel a little bit sorry for us. Some people who come here today do not even know the story of delivery workers, because the companies are giving us very little time. The rules and regulations they give us are not workable. They are giving us less time, and like a game, they give us minutes to go to the store and we wait in the store more than 20 minutes. That is how we lose. Sometimes when you are on the way, sometimes we need to drive on the other side because the apps are giving us wrong times. It is not good enough time. If we do not follow their time, they reduce our rating, and that is how I lose my... I lose my standing. Also, I got into an accident four times. One time I almost died. Thank you very much for

(08:52:07)

your testimony. This panel is excused. I just want to let folks know, obviously there is a Hispanic Heritage event taking place next door. So I promise I can hear you. But I understand that could be a little disruptive to the proceedings. I can hear you, I promise. Next up we have Alpha Mamadou Barry. I also have Alpha Barry, Al Barry and Alpha Mamadou Barry. Okay, we have... whose name is Barry Mamadou? Salmon, Frenzy, Al... Al Bah, Antonio Martinez. Sorry, I know you have been waiting a while. Whose name is... Usman Guzman, Bakuna Sunke, or Sunke — the spelling is C-C-H-E-I-K-I-K-E-O-U-N-A. His first name, last name is K-H-E... Perfect. Oh yeah. Cheike. C-H-E-I-I-K-E. Mamadou Barry. All right, we have space for two more. Glenn Belovski and Brooke Belovski. And I believe this is the last panel we have. But if you have not, please fill out an appearance card and I will get you in the next panel. Okay, with anyone else who is here to testify but has not heard their name, please fill out an appearance card. And if you filled out an appearance card and for some reason we do not have it, our apologies. We will begin with testimony. Okay, to my right is... speaking, sorry. By the way, let me just clarify in terms of the last panel — I was referring to the last in-person panel. We still have folks waiting on Zoom. But I will start with you. Okay.

(08:55:19)

Okay. So good evening. Fellow Chair this evening, Phil, and I see Harvey left. Sorry, sorry. Can you please start the time over and try to keep it down in the committee room. Thank you very much. Okay. Good evening, everybody. CM Wong, and I wish Harvey was still here, and the staff and central staff. Thanks for organizing this very important meeting tonight. Very important. I want to say my name is Glenn Belovski. I am a born and bred New Yorker, very proud of that, and I am very proud to be here honoring all of the immigrants who are working very hard. I am the grandson of an immigrant. I am the son of a fruit peddler. I made deliveries by bicycle. I made deliveries by foot, carrying cases of fruit on my shoulders when I was a younger man. I made deliveries by car, by van. I even jumped out of a van making a delivery back in the day. None of this is funny. These men have hard work to do, but we have to protect ourselves first — the children walking across the street, the average person going to work, just trying to make a living. There has to be some accountability and safety. None of these men who work hard — I do not want to see any of their family members get hurt by anybody, and then that person not be able to take care of that person who got hurt. The responsible parties, the people who are not acting responsibly — those are not these men. Those are the companies who need to be reined in.

What also has to be reined in is DOT and NYPD not enforcing these important rules and laws that our elected officials have worked so hard to put on the books. So we have to get the Police Department to enforce the rules. We have to get DOT to assist in enforcing the rules. And also we have to get the Department of Finance to stop giving out millions of dollars in discounts to Amazon, FedEx and UPS — these kinds of companies making double-parking deliveries and creating congestion and pollution. Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak today.

(08:57:50)

You got it. Next. Hi. My

(08:57:56)

name is Brooke Belovski. I am a disability rights advocate who lives in Manhattan. Thank you, members, central staff and district staff for your help and for taking the time to let me speak. First, pedestrian safety is paramount. Because safety is paramount, I would like to discuss transportation within the disability community and making our streets safer for our community. Unfortunately, there are too many trucks double-parked in our community, causing congestion, blocking our bike lanes, bus lanes, crosswalks and access points. When trucks block bike lanes it creates another dangerous situation. Cyclists are forced out into traffic and people with disabilities are often forced to navigate around vehicles, bikes and other obstacles in places that should be safe and accessible. This is creating streets that are unsafe and difficult for the disability community to navigate. Int 1141-2018 is the fix to this problem. We should stop companies such as Amazon, FedEx and UPS from receiving discounts to double-park. Our streets should not be designed around making it convenient for large companies to double-park while everyone else has to deal with the consequences. We need to keep our bike lanes, bus lanes, crosswalks and access points clear and safe for everyone in our community. Thank you for your time and for

(08:59:09)

listening. Thank you. Next.

(08:59:16)

Hi. How are you? My name is Bubacar. I want to speak in my language. My language is Fulani. Just so people know. Can I

(08:59:29)

speak? Yeah, you can. As a reminder, let us start the clock over again. You can

(08:59:34)

speak in any language you like speaking. Okay.

(09:01:20)

Thank you. Next.

(09:01:26)

...

(09:01:40)

...

(09:01:41)

...I want to thank you. Next. And I want to start this... I think it was over. Well, you say to keep a low profile.

(09:02:16)

...for the delivery system... Antonio... police...

(09:02:23)

We are delivery workers. We are workers. We are part of this community. We are de facto workers who are included in this system. The companies want us to go as fast as possible. This past year, we have taken precautions. We go super fast because the companies demand it of us. Our community — from Africa, Bangladesh, Mexico, Latin America — we have earned much. Our children, because the companies want us to go so fast... when we do not follow their time, they reduce our rating. The accidents are not only our fault. The companies are responsible for the accidents in deliveries. The companies put it on us. We need respect.

(09:03:57)

...speaking.

(09:04:14)

Sorry. Do not start his time yet. Can you get closer to the mic? And as a reminder, you can speak any language you prefer.

(09:04:25)

...

(09:05:18)

Thank you. All right, well, thank you so much for your testimony today. This panel is excused. Our last in-person panel — Mamadou Diallo, come on up.

(09:05:32)

Imran. Okay, this is spelled I-M-R-A-N. Not here, you know. So I believe this person just filled out an appearance card. Oh, Mama Diallo, come on up. MD Mustafa. Does not want to testify. Oh, is it Mohammed Saleh? Yes, sir. Oh yeah. Come on up.

(09:06:26)

Are there any members of the public who are here who have not yet filled out an appearance card who would like to speak?

(09:06:34)

All right, this is the last in-person panel. Go ahead. My English is not very good.

(09:06:53)

Well, that is good. Can you please restart his time? And you can speak any language you like, of course.

(09:07:05)

I have a problem with DoorDash, Uber and other delivery apps. I want to say that I am a delivery worker. I respect Uber. They have a problem with how they treat us. My father... the problem is not the delivery worker.

(09:07:48)

...The companies are not including us in their decisions. They are not treating us fairly. I want to appear before you to say that the municipal government needs to act. Thank you. Next.

(09:09:15)

Good. My name is Damon. I am speaking in my language. I am a delivery worker. I want to say that the companies do not want us to know our rights. We are going to continue. We will get together and we will not give up. We are going to keep going. Thank you.

(09:10:55)

Thank you. Next. Okay.

(09:10:59)

I am a delivery worker in New York City. The companies treat us like machines. The police do not protect us. We want to control our own delivery work. The companies do not care about us. We want to compete fairly. We do not want to lose our place. We want to be part of this. Thank you.

(09:12:38)

...

(09:12:49)

All right. Seeing no one else in person who wishes to testify — is that right?

(09:13:01)

All right. This panel is excused. You are good. I will call up anyone else after. And now for sure. Okay. It does not have to be the last one. It does not have to be.

(09:13:28)

All right. Let us try to keep it down so the witness can speak. All right.

(09:13:34)

I am a delivery worker in New York City. I am a delivery driver. I have a problem with the traffic. The companies do not care about us. They challenge us every day. The delivery companies put us in danger. I want to say that we need protection. Thank you.

(09:15:01)

...

(09:15:07)

...I mean, it was not going to follow me by name. Thank you. Next, please will make sure the microphone is on. ...just trying to... of New York City. ...delivery of a task force... sorry. ...on the company or... someone with the water... ...traffic. ...on extra... ...violation... ...hotel... I am not saying I need a... ...bike lanes charging is to show me... ...parking on... an hour ago... not about some... I want to... from the original. I do not know what. Thank you so much for your testimony today. You are excused. Anyone else in person?
