Municipal Recruitment and Civil Service Pathways
Committee on Civil Service and Labor · September 22, 2026 · 1hr 59m
Source: https://hearinghearings.nyc/hearings/committee-on-civil-service-and-labor-municipal-recruitment-and-civil-service-pathways-2026-09-22/
Video: https://councilnyc.viebit.com/vod/?s=true&v=NYCC-250-8-2_260922-100733.mp4

================================================================

(00:00:01)

Make sure my phone is off. Yeah, good.

(00:00:15)

Good. Welcome to today's New York City Council hearing for the Committee on Civil Service and Labor. At this time please silence cell phones. If you wish to speak in today's hearing, please fill out one of the speaker cards with one of the sergeants. Moving forward, no one is to approach the dais.

(00:00:40)

Good morning and welcome to today's hearing of the New York City Council's Committee on Civil Service and Labor. I am CM Shirley Aldebol, Chair of this Committee. Today we will be discussing Municipal Recruitment and Pathways to Civil Service.

This Committee held a hearing on rebuilding the municipal workforce where we discussed new hiring strategies and heard from DCAS Commissioner to say about how the new administration plans to advance the municipal workforce. These discussions touched on several different strategies to expand pathways into Civil Service. Currently the administration operates several programs aimed at recruiting talented candidates to serve the City they love and ensuring that they are equipped with the information they need to successfully find a position that suits their skills.

The Civil Service Pathways Fellowship, which is administered by DCAS in partnership with CUNY, focuses on recent graduates and offers participants a two-year full-time job with City agencies and a chance to take the civil service exam after the first year of completed service. DCAS also offers the Public Service Corps program, which facilitates internships with the administration through a work-study program for applicants who are currently in their undergraduate or graduate degree programs.

These initiatives are offered alongside regular outreach recruitment events through the Civil Service Ambassador Program. These programs are designed to provide applicants with the skills and information needed to navigate the application process into the municipal workforce, with particular emphasis on increasing equity and representation within civil service. DCAS also has a dedicated Office of Citywide Recruitment which is tasked with building partnerships with educational institutions and community-based organizations to promote City government jobs. These efforts are reflected in the 308 outreach events that OCR participated in in Fiscal Year 2025, conducted across the City.

Furthermore, I want to highlight that OCR has recently expanded the types of pathways at which they are holding these events, including increased outreach at foster care programs and juvenile justice facilities. Yet despite these efforts, the City still has a vacancy rate of nearly 5% overall, with some agencies seeing vacancy rates in the double digits. The Department of Social Services, for example, which serves our most vulnerable New Yorkers, has a vacancy rate of almost 15%, and the Human Rights Commission has a vacancy rate of nearly 20%. Civil service vacancies have remained persistent and we have heard from municipal workers, union representatives and advocates that hiring delays can take over a year.

When that timeline is paired with non-competitive salaries and inconsistent training opportunities, the civil service becomes unattractive to many highly qualified potential employees. Moreover, while we understand that these existing timelines mean that the new administration's expanded strategies will not show measurable results yet, we are committed to ensuring that the policies being discussed today will only serve to improve the civil service process of tomorrow.

This Committee looks forward to conducting oversight on the department's required outreach on recruitment, asking about how new initiatives such as the youth apprenticeship title work, and delving into how this administration plans to focus its efforts to ensure a fully staffed municipal workforce. Before we begin, I would like to thank Committee staff, Senior Policy Analyst Nina Rosenberg and Senior Legislative Counsel, for their work in preparing this hearing, my Chief of Staff Sophia Brown and my District 13 team for the work that you do to serve the Bronx's District 13 constituents.

At this point I would like to recognize that we have been joined by Council Members Frank Morano, Chris and Crystal. I will now hear testimony from representatives of DCAS and I will turn to Committee Counsel to administer the oath for this.

(00:06:08)

Good morning, Chair Aldebol and members of the City Council's Committee on Civil Service and Labor. My name is Katrina Porter and I proudly serve as Deputy Commissioner and Chief Human Capital Officer for the Department of Citywide Administrative Services, more commonly known as DCAS. I am joined today by my colleague Katie, Director of Workforce Operations at DCAS.

We are grateful for the opportunity to be here with you today to discuss the vital City civil service career pathway programs overseen by our agency. Each program has its own distinct qualities but together they create pathways into public service for a wide range of talent, from those just beginning their careers to those looking to advance and grow, as well as professionals with highly specialized skills and expertise. What connects them all is a shared interest in serving government and making a difference for New Yorkers.

Together these programs are part of our broader efforts to bring top talent into City agencies and, most importantly, offer New Yorkers opportunities to build meaningful, long-term and life-changing careers in public service. To achieve this, DCAS supports agencies by employing strategic, targeted and ongoing recruitment efforts as well as creating spaces and forums for professional development. It gives us great pride to say that DCAS is often there for municipal staff from their very first government application to their first day of work, all the way through to the day they retire.

There is strong interest in ensuring that there are ample pipelines into City service and that those pathways are strong, robust and continue to evolve to meet the ever-changing workforce landscape. Recognizing how the way people find, access and engage with information has changed, we have invested in new ways to make civil service more accessible. Starting this past July 1, 2026, civil service exams are now free for New York City high school students and first-time test takers. This includes all of the City's students, those attending a public school, private school, charter school, parochial school or home school. This has also afforded us an opportunity to potentially reach millions of first-time test takers.

This initiative was undertaken as part of our compliance with Local Law 57 of 2025 and illustrates what we can achieve when government works together. It is as much a win for us as it is for the Council and we are grateful for the partnership. Coupled with our existing fee waivers, DCAS is working to ensure that financial barriers do not stop a prospective candidate from applying and taking an exam.

In addition, this past year we rolled out a new update that allowed notices of examination to be translated into any language a candidate is most comfortable with. We would like to recognize CM Carmen De La Rosa for this idea and we are very excited to see how translatable notices of exams can remove limitations to accessing information about civil service opportunities. As part of our compliance with Local Law 191 of 2025, DCAS has also begun producing and distributing brochures to CUNY for prospective, current and recent

(00:09:41)

graduate students, designed to demystify the civil service system and provide easily digestible information on how to get a job in City government. With hundreds of thousands of students across the City, this is another vital touch point to recruit for municipal service.

Now I would like to talk more about our marquee programs at DCAS: the Civil Service Pathway Fellowship, the Urban Fellows Program, the Public Service Corps Summer Internship Program and 55-A.

The Civil Service Pathway Fellowship is a two-year program for City University of New York graduates designed to create a pipeline from college to a career in civil service. The fellowship is full-time and offers a competitive salary and benefits for graduates. Perhaps most importantly, fellows receive professional development training and experience that helps them to qualify for various civil service exams after completing the first year of the program. After completing the program, fellows can transition into a full-time position within their agency. The Civil Service Pathway Fellowship serves as a critical component of our talent pipeline. We recruit interested college and graduate students for seven different career tracks through our program, which helps agencies and mayoral offices fill critical service roles. Just this past year we announced a major expansion to this program, increasing it to 400 fellows, up from the prior 200, doubling the reach of the program and creating a second yearly cohort, creating even more opportunities for recent graduates to join. This program has been nothing short of successful, with approximately 75% of graduates transitioning to full-time jobs from the program.

Another program we administer is the New York City Public Service Corps, the nation's first and largest off-campus internship program that connects undergraduate and graduate students who participate in federal work-study with paid or academic credit internships across a range of City agencies. DCAS partners with New York City colleges, universities and City agencies to offer diverse internship experiences that expose students to public service careers. Celebrating its sixtieth year this year, Public Service Corps provides interns with crucial experience to help set them up on a path to public service. This year, 13 agency partners are hosting more than 120 Public Service Corps interns. This program is a tremendously beneficial one and has seen many City leaders come through the program.

I would also like to highlight two shorter-term programs that we oversee. The first is the Summer Internship Program, which provides graduate and undergraduate students and recent graduates with valuable experience working for City government and exploring career opportunities across a wide range of City agencies. Interns can work during the summer through September for a maximum of 13 weeks. This year over 900 interns were hired across 27 agencies.

The second of our shorter-term programs is the Urban Fellows Program, a nine-month fellowship that combines work at mayoral offices and City agencies with volunteer service opportunities and a weekly seminar series that explores current urban issues impacting public policy. Urban Fellows are placed at an array of agencies across the City where they learn about public policy through a hands-on approach. We continue to see a growing number of fellows remain in City government, with 77% staying on last year and 38% staying on this year.

The last pathway I would like to speak on is our 55-A program, a valuable asset in our recruitment portfolio. Our administration of the 55-A program allows a qualified person with a certified mental or physical disability to be hired into competitive civil service positions without having to take an exam. As stated earlier, most positions require candidates to take and pass a competitive civil service exam before they can be hired. Through our 55-A program, eligible persons are evaluated for positions based on their qualifications and interviews. This program is a great equalizer for municipal hiring and promotes City work in an equitable manner for New Yorkers. Currently we are working closely with the Mayor's Office of People with Disabilities to amplify its reach.

In tandem with our marquee recruitment programs, civil service exams continue to be the most important pathway into City jobs. Exams are the most well-known facets of DCAS's work to promote municipal work to New Yorkers. More than 80% of City government positions require a civil service test and it is the most critical pathway to service that we oversee. Each year DCAS administers more than 200 exams. Administering exams is one thing. Making sure New Yorkers know about those opportunities, understand the process and can easily take the next step is another.

That is why we take every opportunity to broaden the conversation around civil service exams and the benefits of a career with the City. We are expanding our outreach across media channels, developing thoughtful strategic social media content designed to demystify civil service and meeting New Yorkers where they are. We are also finding ways to make the exam process more accessible and streamlined, evidenced by innovations like the New York City Bridge Exam. With the New York City Bridge Exam, candidates pay one fee, take one exam and become eligible for multiple positions. In its fifth year of administration, Bridge Exams are removing barriers and making the path into public service a far more efficient process for New Yorkers.

As for recruitment, our Office of Citywide Recruitment is focused on meeting New Yorkers where they are across all five boroughs and at every stage of their career journey. You will find DCAS representatives at New York City Jobs hiring halls, at career fairs and in communities, connecting directly with New Yorkers looking for work. We also partner with City agencies to host title-specific hiring events that help address their immediate workforce needs. These efforts connect with New Yorkers where they are and I am proud to say that we have engaged tens of thousands of prospective candidates across the five boroughs through these programs.

Our work is not just about filling jobs. We are also invested in helping New Yorkers understand how they can build a career in public service. Throughout each year we hold civil service one-on-one presentations at New York City public schools, higher education institutions, with community-based organizations and at faith-based institutions across the City, providing practical information about how to navigate the civil service process and explore opportunities in municipal government.

We also look to connect to a wide range of audiences through multiple mediums, from direct person-to-person engagement to social media and press outreach. We take a comprehensive approach to promote civil service. In addition, we also publish the New York City Jobs Newsletter and send out monthly e-blasts to get the word out to hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers about career opportunities in municipal government. With the monthly New York City Jobs Newsletter alone we reach more than 250,000 New Yorkers looking for work. Beyond that, we also manage and maintain New York City's jobs website. In 2025, the New York City Jobs website received over... applications. When it comes to social media, we are currently expanding our presence online and looking to more broadly utilize this important touch point. As per our last analysis, average reach across our social media channels is north of 400,000 impressions and growing. When it comes to social media, we are executing a highly intentional, data-driven

(00:18:07)

strategy to maximize this critical touch point. Rather than simply expanding our presence, we have actively shifted our focus to authentic storytelling, short-form video and real-time community engagement. As a result of this approach, our latest analysis for the month of... shows our cumulative reach across our social media channels has surged to over 460,000 impressions, a massive 251% increase year over year. Additionally, this strategic pivot has skyrocketed engagement interactions by 329% and our video views by 408%, proving that our streamlined operations are deeply resonating with New Yorkers and rapidly growing our digital community.

In conclusion, at DCAS we are passionate about helping New Yorkers join civil service and we are working tirelessly to position the City of New York as an employer of choice. The civil service system unquestionably provides a pathway to the middle class for underserved and underrepresented communities. Through the initiatives, programs, apprenticeships and partnerships we have detailed here, DCAS has continued to expand access to government jobs. As we look ahead, please know that we are actively enacting strategic plans that will make our civil service system faster, more transparent and aligned with the 21st century workforce. I am happy now to answer any questions you have.

(00:19:45)

Thank you so much for your testimony. I want to recognize CM Cabán who is online. I am going to, rather than start asking questions myself, as I have a lot of questions to ask, turn it over to my colleagues first. I know there are other hearings going on and I want you to have an opportunity. I am here for the long haul. So I am going to turn it over first to CM Morano.

(00:20:27)

To ask...

(00:20:28)

Thank you, Chair. I appreciate the consideration. I think every Council member has the experience of being in a hearing for 20, 30, 40 minutes without being able to ask a single question because the chair chooses to ask so many of those questions. So thank you for the consideration as well. Thank you, Deputy Commissioner, for your testimony as well. I want to begin with our veterans. I have the privilege of serving as the Veterans Committee Chair, so it is an issue that I am particularly interested in. Your testimony discusses several recruitment programs, but I would like to know what we are doing specifically to recruit veterans into City government. We know veterans can use Vet Connect to access different employment services, but the Comptroller's report recently raised some concerns about that portal. What is DCAS doing to recruit veterans simply beyond referring them to a website?

(00:21:26)

Thank you for that question. First and foremost, we work very closely with our sister agency, the Department of Veterans' Services, to share information about upcoming examinations and information that would help attract veterans into the City's workforce. In addition, as it relates to our examination program, veterans are also eligible to claim special credits and fee waivers to help remove any barriers into the civil service system. I would also mention that we most recently participated in an event with the Department of Veterans' Services to share information about civil service. Our Office of Citywide Recruitment attended and we were there to share information about the civil service system in general, examinations and other services that would be available to veterans who are looking to join the workforce. In general, we do share that information broadly with our sister agency.

(00:22:33)

Thank you for that question. We do engage communities that work specifically with veterans. Across the years we try to develop relationships specifically with those organizations and we also try to work with schools that have veteran-specific offices and to share information about civil service, to go into more details about the veteran fee waivers, the spouse fee waivers and also going into more details about what it means to qualify for the veterans credit. We also have those on our mailing list who are getting our newsletters on a regular basis. There are always opportunities to increase our outreach to those communities but we definitely make a dedicated effort to reach that community.

(00:23:18)

A couple of quick non-veterans-related questions. Your testimony says the website received more than a million applications last year. That is an enormous number. How many of those applications actually resulted in someone getting a job? Do you track that?

(00:23:37)

We do. For fiscal year 2025 it was about a little over 20,000 positions filled through the jobs website.

(00:23:46)

Those are positions that do not require a civil service exam — it is interview-based hiring. But yes, that is the number, about 20,000. One of the things that came up in the recent budget battle is the battle over positions that we might be paying for, or which might be called for in the budget, but are not necessarily filled. How many of the applications that you received were submitted for positions that agencies did not yet have the approval or funding to fill?

(00:24:17)

That is a good question. We would have to get back to you to give you a concrete number, but in general positions that are posted on the jobs website are approved to be filled.

(00:24:28)

Gotcha. I noticed something interesting towards the end of your testimony. You report that your social media impressions are up 251% — we will have to chat privately so you can give me some tips. Audience interactions are up 329% and video views are up 408%. Those are remarkably impressive numbers. But how many additional people actually got hired because of those campaigns? Are you measuring that? Because I do not necessarily think the public should judge a recruitment program by how many people watch the video. We should judge it obviously by whether they found jobs or not.

(00:25:05)

So first I will say that those numbers are directly attributable to our Commissioner's commitment to getting out information about City jobs and demystifying how to engage with the system. What I would say is that it would be a little difficult to correlate folks that are actually getting jobs to the information that we are posting on social media. However, I think that it is an amazing step in the right direction to just continue to share information about the good jobs that are available.

(00:25:40)

One final question, if I may, Chair. According to the Council's briefing paper, DCAS held 170 qualifying civil service ambassador events in fiscal year 2025. Only seven were on Staten Island. Your testimony says you are meeting New Yorkers where they are across all five boroughs. How many Staten Islanders actually got hired as a result?

(00:26:04)

Of those seven events, we would have to check and see if we can get back to you on that. But the main focus of these events is to share information about the system, not so much to tout a specific job or position. The goal is to help folks understand how to engage with us and where to go for information in the event that they are looking for a particular job.

(00:26:26)

And I do not know if you want to add anything else. Okay. Thank you. Thank you.

(00:26:32)

Thank you, Council Member. Council Member Hudson, thank you so much.

(00:26:34)

Thank you, Chair. Hello, Deputy Commissioner. I have one question. I noticed we continue to see a growing number of fellows remaining in City government. This was specifically about the Urban Fellows Program, with 77% staying on last year and 38% staying on this year. Which years can those numbers be attributed to specifically — calendar years or fiscal years?

(00:27:02)

So that would be for the program here. Our Urban Fellows Program...

(00:27:05)

...usually starts — let us see, this year we have a new group that starts from 2026, so they will go into 2027. So for the 38% it was from 2025 to 2026, and then the 78% was from 2024 to 2025. So they run from September to August. We have some people that stay on until — yes.

(00:27:29)

Okay. I am just trying to figure out why there was such a drop, and if the year that you are referring to for the 38% is completed or if this is a partial number.

(00:27:42)

So it is completed. There are several factors that tie into whether or not individuals are able to stay on. As we mentioned, it is a nine-month program and so we do a couple of things in order to keep folks that are engaged and interested in City government. We also know that individuals that participate in the program relocate from a different city or state to participate, and so it also depends on the opportunities that are available to them. So we know that for the 78%, which was for the previous...

(00:28:18)

...2024 to 2025 — and sorry, I did not catch the nine-month piece. So yes, both are completed. But the 77% you said is from 2024 into 2025? Yes. Okay. Sorry.

(00:28:32)

Yes. And so it really depends on the vacancies and the positions that are available and the interests of the candidates. We do a lot of work making sure people are aware of the civil service process, or that we are not taking civil service exams that are directly related to the positions that they are doing the fellowship with, so they are able to go into those full-time positions at the agencies. For the last program, where we ended up at 38%, we know that there are still individuals that are interested and engaged. They are currently going through the interview process, or they may be considering or taking an exam and waiting for their position on the list to be higher.

(00:29:16)

Okay. So then based on that I would say it is safe to assume that perhaps more people from the last year could potentially be hired. Yes. Okay. So the 77% is counting people from the 2024 to 2025 year who could have still been hired in 2026, and so that could be attributed to the lower number with the 38%.

(00:29:38)

It just seems like a big drop, so I am just trying to figure out... Definitely 77% seems like a great number and a lot of people that moved on into civil servant work, and 38% not so much. But if people are still going through the process, okay.

And then I just had another question. Many City positions are vital to the health and well-being of New Yorkers but require extremely technical and detailed knowledge. For example, the current Legionnaires' outbreak has been exacerbated by staffing shortages for water inspectors, and trained DOB building inspectors are integral to support the City's ambitious housing strategy. How does DCAS target its recruitment for hard-to-recruit or specialty titles that require immediate staffing of highly qualified technical experts? Are there any special processes for urgent situations such as the Legionnaires' outbreak? Are there methods to expedite accreditation or certification for positions that require such credentials?

(00:30:39)

What I will start by saying is that DCAS works in partnership with the City to develop our annual examination schedule. About 80% of the positions that are used across the City require exams, so that is first and foremost. Our first step with agencies is understanding their immediate hiring needs to ensure that we are developing a recruitment strategy to...

(00:31:06)

...support their immediate and future hiring needs. Can I just ask you there — do those assessments ever change in real time? So you might coordinate with or find out from an agency at the beginning of the year what their needs will be, and then you have an outbreak such as this Legionnaires' outbreak and the needs change. How quickly are you able to shift your recruitment...

(00:31:30)

...efforts? We are able to shift immediately. Immediately meaning we can move an exam later in the exam schedule to give the agency more flexibility to conduct interview-based hiring, or add an exam to the annual examination schedule and use the applicant pool as a recruitment source. So as folks are applying we provide that data to agencies so that they can immediately engage with it for immediate hiring needs. We also have the Office of Citywide Recruitment boots on the ground that can help amplify immediate hiring needs and also host what we call special hiring events to attract top talent for immediate hiring needs. So it is really more about agencies communicating their needs to us and us being immediately available to address any hiring needs that they have.

Do you know if, either during the outbreak on the Upper East Side or now as there is one in the South Bronx, any of those positions have been filled? We would have to get back to you on that. Exact hiring happens at the agency level, so unless the agency amplifies it to DCAS for support we would not have insight into direct hiring that is happening at the agency...

(00:32:52)

...level. Do you know if DOHMH did that?

(00:32:56)

I would have to flag that. We can definitely circle back. I do not have that information in front of...

(00:33:00)

...me. Okay. It would be great to know whether or not that happened in real time, of course, and is currently happening. Thank you. You are welcome. Thank you, Chair. Thank you, Council Member. So we are aware that DCAS has been undertaking a minimum...

(00:33:22)

...qualifications review of civil service titles in the hopes of removing some unnecessarily restrictive eligibility requirements. As of April 2025, DCAS reviewed 90 titles resulting in amendments to requirements for 61 of those titles, impacting 53,000 individual positions. Have there been more minimum qualification reviews completed since then? How many titles have been amended and how many individual positions do these amendments impact? Thank you.

(00:33:57)

Thank you for that question, Chair. As a quick update, currently we have reviewed about 116 titles and we have seen a slight increase and expansion to about 69 titles. This process is ongoing. We are continuing to review minimum qualification requirements for the titles in the City's title portfolio.

(00:34:24)

...adjustments were necessary. According to the recently released Mayor's Management Report, in fiscal year 2026 there were 119,117 applications received for civil service exams compared to 166,000 in fiscal year 2025. What does DCAS attribute the decrease in applications to?

(00:34:57)

Thank you for that question. The dynamic in those numbers is really based on the exams that we are offering for a particular fiscal year. So for instance, in fiscal years when we are offering a title like Sanitation Worker, where we receive about 150,000 applications, we will see an increase — that number would be higher than a year where maybe we are giving more technical titles like engineering or more specialized titles where we see smaller applicant...

(00:35:31)

...pools. I can give you a more direct answer, but in general that is usually why you see the fluctuation in examination numbers. And is that testing schedule based on the needs that the agencies...

(00:35:51)

...ask DCAS for? Yes. Civil service lists in general are usually valid, so long as there are candidates available, for up to four years. So we usually give exams on a two-to-three-year cycle unless it is a title where there is an immediate hiring need where we need to give it more often. So like Police Officer — we know that the City is in need of police officers, so we give that exam every month. We give it 12...

(00:36:22)

...times a year. Whereas a title like Sanitation Worker, where we have a larger applicant pool, we give that exam every three to four years.

(00:36:29)

And how frequently do you actually hire from those lists? Like for example the Police...

(00:36:36)

...Officer list? Yes. So hiring happens at the agency level. The way it works is that they would contact DCAS when they are ready to hire and then we would issue them what we call a list certification, which contains the names of candidates who took and passed the examination and are available to be considered for...

(00:36:54)

...employment. And generally speaking, how long does it take to establish a list and then certify the list and actually get people hired off the list?

(00:37:03)

That is a great question. If we look at the data — if we look at the Mayor's Management Report where we have a metric that measures the time between when we administer an exam and when an exam list is established — right now we are under target. We have a median time of 101 days between exam administration and establishment. Now once the list is established, it would depend upon the agency's need to hire. That will determine how quickly those...

(00:37:37)

...lists move. So why does it take so long for exams to be scored? Because 101 business days is quite a long time. People are looking for a job, they are waiting, they take an exam, they are waiting. It is still a long time, even though there is a decrease from 158 business days.

(00:38:02)

I can definitely explain that. There are legally mandated processes that come along with the exam development process, mostly to ensure that our test takers have the ability to review and appeal parts of the process that they have questions about. By law we have to set aside a certain amount of time to administer those processes. In general, what takes the most time is those legally mandated aspects of the process that we must manage...

(00:38:43)

...before we can establish an examination. I know that we had a hearing on Legionnaires' and a DOHMH Commissioner said that they got authorization to hire — they got the budgeted headcount in and they were able to hire before the summer, roughly six to seven months, which is a much shorter timeframe. Still, it is quite long.

(00:39:21)

But a much shorter timeframe to get people hired. I guess in an emergency situation...

(00:39:30)

...how does that happen, and why can we not seem to do that for other technical titles like that one?

(00:39:42)

Our goal is to continue to look for ways to streamline and expedite the hiring process and we are doing that through reviewing our technology and figuring out ways to move things faster. I will say that I am proud of the DCAS team and how we have been able to reduce the time between exam administration and list establishment. In some cases we are establishing lists within 90 days. For Police Officer we have a standard where within 120 days that list is available to the agency to hire from.

In addition, I would also add that there are opportunities for agencies to leverage data — the data that comes along with the process, the applicant pool from the application period — if an agency has an immediate hiring need, to help expedite their recruitment process. We are always looking for ways to improve. There is room for improvement and we are committed to doing so.

(00:41:01)

Of the 208 civil service exams that were open for filing in fiscal year 2025, 57 of those exams took fewer than 100 days for completion. The Mayor's Management Report describes that there is a variation in the median completion time due to the types of exams administered, with single-part exams being quicker to grade than investigation-before-appointment exams, which require an additional investigative stage. Given the fact that exam grading already takes a significant amount of time, are there ways that the investigative stage could be completed prior to examination, or could it be done by a different team than the core staff who are tasked with grading the exams?

(00:41:47)

That is a great question and we are looking for ways to reimagine how we manage investigate-before-appointment titles and we do recognize that it is a longer timeline. But once again, that process does not preclude an agency from hiring. If they have an immediate hiring need they can use that published list to hire from and so we complete the fuller background investigations. But we do recognize that it is a very protracted process and we are looking for ways to reduce that timeframe. Thank you.

(00:42:24)

Initiatives that are aimed toward recruiting high quality candidates such efforts can be fruitless due to the extended timeline for examination and hire, which in some cases can take well over a year. Many applicants simply cannot wait that long for a job offer.

(00:42:47)

What advice do you have for candidates who are in this difficult position and do you have suggestions for how this recruitment and hiring process can be expedited through removal of bureaucratic hurdles? And what bureaucratic hurdles or barriers can realistically be removed to make it faster? Thank you.

(00:43:10)

What I will say is that we do recognize that the City's process has been a point of concern for the general public and folks who have been looking for employment for some time. What I can say here is that we recognize that and we are in talks with our sister agencies, with labor, with the City Council to develop new strategies to demystify the civil service and how to engage with the civil service system overall. We also have the Office of Citywide Recruitment. Katrina, if you want to share some of the strategies that your team uses to engage and inform the public about civil service...

(00:43:58)

Thank you.

(00:43:58)

One of the things that we make clear is that there is more than one way to get into City government. We want to make sure that if somebody has taken an exam, they are not just waiting for the results of that. We let them know that there are other opportunities to get an immediate hire, so they can apply for open vacancies on our website. They can participate in some of our immediate hire events that we hold. We also, if there is somebody that is qualified, speak to them about our pathway programs. I think one of the main things is just letting people know the different options that are available to them. It is not like a sit-and-wait. It is like, start the application process early. If you are in school you are able to apply for a position or an exam before you graduate. So we really use that forum to make sure that people know what options are available to them.

(00:44:51)

I want to go back to the topic of veterans and underrepresented populations. Do we have data on our partnerships with the Department of Veterans Affairs? I do not have that number right now but we can definitely get back to you. One of the things that we try to do is partner — as Katrina mentioned, the recent event that we participated in — we try to do special events like our City Talk sessions where we try to get veterans who are serving in different roles. Normally we try to look at...

(00:45:34)

Not just the direct uniform roles as some people envision veterans going into, but to show a diversity of the work that veterans can do within our City government, to just spotlight some of the things that they are doing so other individuals can see themselves in the program. But we can definitely get back to you on the total events that we have done. Thank you. I appreciate that.

(00:45:57)

So I want to talk a little bit about the past implementation pursuant to...

(00:46:05)

Local Law 191 of 2025. DCAS was required to provide materials to CUNY by July 1 of this year to promote careers in civil service. These materials include information about the civil service process, descriptions of related CUNY programs and a link to the examination web page. Given DCAS's close coordination with CUNY on many civil service pathway initiatives, are there any courses or programs offered at CUNY that you would recommend to civil service applicants writ large to help improve career readiness?

(00:46:44)

Our engagement with CUNY is more about promoting the opportunities that are available to them — the civil service examinations. What we notice is that a lot of people are just not aware of the program. And because of the diversity in the jobs that are available in City government, it is hard for us to say, "Hey, if you take this particular class then you can apply for City jobs." There is a variety of jobs that CUNY students can qualify for, especially with our civil service pathway programs. There are about seven different career tracks. So we focused a lot on giving them the information about how to get into those programs.

We partnered with CUNY for CUNY-specific events where we are sharing information about the application process. We have individuals that have gone through the process speak to them about what that process has been like. Whenever we are having events we want to make sure that they are invited to participate in those sessions and sometimes it could be tied to career readiness, like how to excel in the events that we have coming up. So we do not particularly direct them to a class because of the nature of the jobs within the City, but we focus on information on how to get a job in City government. Thank you.

(00:48:03)

Local Law 192 of 2025 requires DCAS to expand its promotion of civil service exams, particularly through LinkedIn and agency social media, agency websites and advertisements. For these modes of advertisement, are you able to gather information on which forms of advertisement have been more impactful? So I guess the question is, when people apply for jobs, do you ask them...

(00:48:36)

We do have a question on our applications where we ask people how they found out about it. But one of the things with our programming is that the timing is usually not an immediate response, because we provide information about the civil service exams or the jobs but because of that process it could be a couple of months later or another year later before we can see the results from those advertisements. We do have the opportunity for somebody to say they heard about it from social media. There are opportunities to update that list, but normally what we see when people respond to that is they select the very first thing that is on that list. So it is not necessarily a reliable source to show exactly where people are finding out about the jobs or the exams.

(00:49:35)

I think it is helpful to know what is the most impactful way to get information out to people so that you can then prioritize.

(00:49:49)

Absolutely. What we are seeing — if we have a list of how people find out about the job — number one is often "I heard from a colleague." Sometimes that is what individuals select. But we still look at it and there is an opportunity for us to go back and see within the last few months what that looks like. We often see that people just gravitate to the first option that is on the list.

(00:50:11)

Even for the job fairs that you hold or anything like that, do you ask people how they found out about those particular events and how are you advertising those events?

(00:50:23)

For the job fairs that we hold that are specific to a title, we would advertise with our list of organizations that we work with, so we will send them the information. We have those positions posted on our job board as well as a DCAS recruitment page for it. We create flyers and share them out to our communities and include them in our newsletter. So there are a variety of ways that we engage with people. I would have to go back and check to see what the responses have been in terms of how people find out about those specific events.

(00:51:02)

In an effort to make the application process less prohibitive, Local Laws 113 of 2023 and 57 of 2025 both focus on providing civil service examination fee waivers for justice-involved individuals, high school applicants and first-time applicants. Has DCAS tracked the examinations that such fee waivers were used for and whether there are any trends indicating that fee waivers can be used as a tool to encourage more applicants?

(00:51:35)

Fee waivers are offered but I do not have the information handy here. What I can tell you is that since implementation, about 2,000 individuals have requested first-time test taker fee waivers and 57 high school applicants have requested a fee waiver.

(00:51:55)

If it is important we can get back to you with the exact exams that they requested those waivers for.

(00:52:00)

Thank you, that would be helpful. So on the Civil Service Ambassador Program — in fiscal year 2025, DCAS conducted 178 outreach events that met the Civil Service Ambassador Program requirements, which is a huge leap from the events that were held in fiscal year 2024. Have you noticed an increase in applications or attendance at hiring halls or career fairs that corresponds with this increase in outreach events? Thank you.

(00:52:35)

I love this part because I am excited to speak about the great work that the team does to engage the community. Within the career pathways team we try to look at the needs of the agencies and the needs of the City and where we need to really make more impact and do outreach. For fiscal year 2025 we were really focused on increasing our presence across the five boroughs and also working with our educational institutions, both with high schools and colleges.

I do want to clarify that we had 95 qualifying events in fiscal year 2024, not 48. But we are trying to use more targeted outreach to engage the communities and making sure that we are reaching larger groups. Every year we evaluate how we do outreach and sometimes we have to figure out what combination of events we can have, what different types of events we can have that will reach the larger population — the same population that we are trying to target — throughout the Civil Service Ambassador Program.

Because of the nature of the program and the communities that we are reaching, we may be speaking to somebody that is in high school who may not be ready to apply for an exam. It is hard to specifically tie an increase in applications to an increase in the events that we did for that same year in fiscal year 2025.

(00:54:07)

DCAS significantly expanded the locations and settings that Civil Service Ambassador Program events were held in. As part of this expansion there were events held at locations that DCAS had not reached in the past, such as juvenile justice facilities and foster care programs. Was there measurable interest in the materials that DCAS is distributing at these locations and are you able to share if there are any individuals from these groups who submitted applications for civil service exams following these events?

(00:54:45)

I am sorry, Chair, can you repeat the question?

(00:54:51)

Was there measurable interest in the materials that DCAS is distributing at these locations, such as juvenile justice centers?

(00:55:05)

At juvenile justice facilities and foster care programs — yes. I think one of the great things that we see is whenever we go out there to speak to anyone in the community it is always like, "Oh, I did not know." There is an option that is available to us here, especially when we engage with justice-impacted individuals. There is this misconception that "I cannot work for government if I am justice-impacted." So we see a lot of people — it is just about bringing the awareness to them that this is available for you and here is the process. We continue to engage that community because there continues to be interest in the information that we are sharing.

(00:55:52)

This Council has heard significant concerns from justice-involved youth about critical barriers to education, particularly at secure detention facilities. Many young people report that they are not going to school or receiving an education. In the best cases, youth are given educational packets that receive little to no instruction. Would DCAS consider providing justice-involved youth with referrals to CUNY courses or career readiness materials to improve their likelihood of entering civil service?

(00:56:27)

What I would say is that we are supportive of working with our sister agencies who oversee these facilities to ensure that justice-involved youth have information readily available to them regarding the civil service system. That is something that we can definitely follow up on. Okay, thank you. In August 2026 the Civil Service Pathways Fellowship Program's capacity doubled from 200 to 400 fellows. Is that correct?

(00:57:03)

What changes does DCAS need to make to accommodate this expansion and are there plans to expand the fellowship further and if so, what are those changes?

(00:57:15)

And plans, yes. So we are very proud of the Civil Service Pathway Fellowship Program. We have seen success with administering the program across the City. In order for us to expand the program further it does require us to interact with the State Civil Service Commission to develop proposals to expand the number. This is the third time that we are going back to the State to expand the program. Pretty much what they are looking for is that we are maximizing the number of positions that they approved previously. Once we get to a place where we are fully allocating the 400 positions, we are prepared to go back to the State to continue to increase that number.

(00:58:07)

We have been joined by a Council member. Good morning, Council member. I am going to take a break from asking questions to see if CM Restler has any questions. Brilliant, thank you.

(00:58:18)

Chair, this is my first time joining one of your hearings and it is a pleasure. You are one of my favorite new colleagues here in the Council and you have been just a tremendous asset and chair of this committee. I feel like I go to you for questions and guidance on a range of issues and it has been really helpful and I really appreciate it. So thank you for bringing your expertise to the Council. It has been a wonderful addition to the body.

Thank you, Deputy Commissioner, and team at DCAS. I had a number of conversations with our amazing new DCAS Commissioner at the beginning of her tenure and she really emphasized that fixing the civil service process is at the top of her priority list. I really welcome that because we need that prioritization. We need to do a better job of hiring in City government.

(00:59:03)

The timelines that it takes right now are simply unacceptable.

(00:59:09)

The first question I just wanted to lean in on is around the hard-to-recruit positions. We have so many jobs in City government where we fail to fill them consistently over many years but do not do very much about it. I was recently reading a book that emphasized that when a transit authority hired more engineers it actually significantly reduced costs on their contracts and that we need to do a better job of building in-house capacity. I know that has long been a priority and we should do more insourcing, not outsourcing. If we can fill those hard-to-recruit positions it would make a huge difference.

So I wanted to ask, firstly, has there been a comprehensive review of increasing salaries for hard-to-recruit positions, even with an analysis of the savings that that could generate for the City of New York — the case for why we should be increasing these specific positions? I know this is part of our challenge but I know you are the ones who are really trying to solve it and trying to save us money. So please help us solve it.

(01:00:21)

What I can say is that there are many strategies and discussions that are under way to figure out how to modernize the civil service system, make things move faster and build more transparency and better support City agencies and the services that they provide. DCAS — we are not involved in salary setting per se, but we can definitely take the question back and get you an answer on whether anything is going...

(01:00:54)

On. But I am not aware of anyone doing a comprehensive review of hard-to-recruit positions that I am privy to. But there are other discussions that are under way to figure out how to modernize the system. I know it could seem potentially expensive but I really think there are cost savings actually in solving for these vacancies and insourcing more so that we do not have to rely on outside consultants because we do not have the capacity. I really think that DCAS will need to do that comprehensive review.

Relatedly, we had...

(01:01:31)

Really bad retention data during the Eric Adams administration. I get it — I think a lot of people did not want to work for Eric Adams and his administration for obvious enough reasons. But the City workforce is continuing to get older and older, as I am sure you know much better than me. How are you thinking about addressing the aging workforce and getting the next generation ready to take the baton, particularly in areas where we are really dependent on the knowledge and expertise of older workers?

(01:02:01)

Yeah, that is a great question. In my testimony, where we are invested in attracting young people to City government, utilizing new modes of operation like social media to get folks excited about civil service. Our Commissioner is out there, boots on the ground, making it happen every day and getting us all charged up about what the future offers. But things like the pathway programs that we are here talking about, the fee waivers for high schoolers and first-time test takers, expanding internships and apprenticeships — these are all strategies that we think could help us engage the next wave of civil

(01:02:50)

servants. That is great, and I have loved seeing the Commissioner out there, just trying to bring more people into the City workforce. On the internship models, Chair De La Rosa — a previous chair of this committee — had wonderful legislation that it is great to see this administration implementing around the internship model. I think that when I have had a chance to read the Workforce Profile Report, which I feel like is always delayed, I hope... when was the last one released?

(01:03:19)

We are one fiscal year behind, and when I saw you come in, CM, I knew you were going to ask about it. I know you were thinking it. We are working on it. I love the Workforce Report — one of the great reports of City government — and...

(01:03:33)

But what it highlights in particular is where we have those gaps, where people are aging out and we need to be recruiting. So it is not just recruiting across the board — it is in that targeted way of where do we really need help.

Could I do one more question? Then I will stop. Thank you so much. The last thing I wanted to ask is, I really feel that DCAS should be measuring itself and we should be holding you all accountable from the time a test is posted until the time somebody is hired. We need to be thinking about that kind of global life cycle from exam to hiring. I know you are not in control of every step of that process, I get it, but you are the closest thing we have — as the Deputy Commissioner for Talent, as the person thinking globally about how do we make these systems work better.

I really hope that as you think about the MMR moving forward, as we think about holding ourselves accountable to do a better job streamlining this process, we can lay out what that timeline looks like from beginning to end. Because it is not just the pieces in DCAS's control — we need to hold the agencies accountable too. I know you bring in the HR representatives, I know you do your best to provide guidance and input to help them do their jobs better. But we should have really good data that shows us that HPD is actually doing a great job with DCAS but that DOHMH is falling short, or whatever it may be. We need to see that data and we need to hold ourselves accountable from beginning to end.

(01:05:03)

To understand where in the process we are having our greatest obstacles. Have you thought about a kind of global accountability framework from exam posting to hiring dates across the board, for how we can do a better job of holding agencies and titles accountable in their hiring of individual titles?

Yes, the short answer is yes. We are looking at that. We are in the initial stages of those conversations and it is challenging to track what you are describing, only because we work in a decentralized environment and there is data that we just do not have access to. But we agree that that is something that we need to focus on and better...

(01:05:41)

...track. And this is where we need leadership from City Hall. DCAS has the right intentions and wants to make this work, but we need City Hall to tell the agencies they all need to work with them and they need to provide this information. When we had sexual harassment issues, DCAS was that centralized force — City Hall said to the agencies, you need to provide this data, you need to work together — and it worked. So we just need that same level of accountability here. Chair, as always, thank you very much. I really appreciate the chance to go a bit over and thank you and your team for the chance to ask some questions.

(01:06:09)

Today, thank you, CM. I have got to go to the Bronx.

(01:06:13)

Thank you. On that particular issue, it seems like the agencies are siloed when it comes to hiring. Is that correct?

Yes, each agency is responsible — they have their own HR departments and they are responsible for recruiting and hiring, and we are here to support them through examinations and other methods. Our small but mighty Office of Citywide Recruitment helps them navigate and amplify immediate hiring needs that they have.

So essentially you wait for them to say, "Hey, we need to hire 20 people in this hard-to-recruit title," and then what steps do you take to make sure that that happens?

(01:07:15)

So in some instances there are many different ways for agencies to recruit and hire. There are different title classifications that have different rules and regulations, but the foundation of the City's civil service system are competitive titles that require examination. That is why we administer so many exams a year — on average about 200 — and that is the opportunity for agencies to communicate to DCAS any immediate or future hiring needs that we should be helping them to prepare for.

But in the mix of that, if anything comes up, we are always there to support them by amplifying, by hosting special hiring events to help at a centralized location and do on-the-spot hiring. So there are many different strategies that we use to support agencies and their HR shops. But exams are by far the cornerstone of the system.

(01:08:18)

So back to the Civil Service Pathways Fellowship — in 2026, DCAS added a new career track to the fellowship offerings, which is customer service and community engagement. Can you tell us more about that career track?

(01:08:35)

Yes. So one of the things that we do when we are looking at the program is identify where the City's needs are. The Civil Service Pathways Fellowship is one of the ways that we address hard-to-recruit titles in the areas where we need help. Through conversations with our agencies and their needs, we learned that there was a need to have something specific to folks that are engaged in outreach, community outreach and community engagement. So we worked with our internal partners to make sure that there was an opportunity for individuals who are specifically going to school and are interested in working in those pathways to have an opportunity to participate in the fellowship and eventually be hired full time into those

(01:09:27)

positions. You stated that since the program launched in 2019, over 75% of fellows that have completed the Civil Service Pathways Fellowship transitioned into full-time employment. Do you track data that speaks to how many fellows have successfully completed the fellowship but did not pursue employment with the City? And do you know where those fellows

(01:09:56)

end up? So we know that with the 78% that transitioned into a full-time position, for those that did not complete the fellowship, they have gone into another position across City agencies or they have left City government completely. That is one of the things that we are looking at — seeing the retention rate for folks that are interested in continuing their government career. We are seeing that number increase as we go through the different cohorts.

(01:10:25)

And what is the annual attrition rate of the Civil Service Pathways Program for this current cohort and the previous? What percent of fellows finish the program? And what are the main barriers to completion of the program?

So the way the program is set up, it is a two-year program. For the cohort that just started this year, normally the attrition would be... it is just regular employment, right?

(01:10:59)

As you get into a position, there are opportunities for professional development where a person may not be directly aligned with the vacancy that they are in, or the person may choose to self-select out of the program. So that is where we will see the transition where a person no longer participates in the program. But for the cohorts that have completed, we have up to 76% that have transitioned into a full-time position, where 33% of those who have transitioned have

(01:11:37)

reached permanent status. So it really depends, but most of the folks that are participating and complete are going into full-time positions. But my question is a little bit different — how many of those who enter the program, what percentage actually complete the program?

(01:11:54)

I understand that of the people that complete the program, 76% of them stay in public service.

(01:12:03)

But program completion — how many, how...

(01:12:06)

...what percentage actually completes the program, finishes the two years?

(01:12:10)

Yeah, so the completion is that the person ends at two years and then they go into full-time positions. We do not really see folks that complete the program and then decide, "Hey, I no longer want to stay within City government." So it is going to be roughly the same percentage. And what do you think — almost a quarter of the program completers do not enter City government. Why do you think the program completers...

(01:12:42)

...a quarter of them do not enter City government? I am sorry, can you repeat the question for me please? Why do you think almost a quarter of the program completers do not enter City government?

(01:12:58)

Do you know why? Do you have an understanding? Do you survey them? It could be for a variety of reasons, right? Sometimes individuals are going into a particular position or working with a particular agency, and sometimes, just like any career move that individuals make, they decide that the position is not right for them.

(01:13:22)

Or because of the employment practices and the needs of the agency, maybe the person is not ideal for that position.

(01:13:30)

And we do not currently survey the individuals that leave the program. That is something that we can definitely look at to find out exactly why it is that they are leaving the program and not entering full-time City employment in the agency in which they held their fellowship. The majority of the movement that we have is moving into a full-time position with the agency.

(01:13:56)

If fellows elect to pursue employment with a different agency, how is their placement determined?

(01:14:02)

Do they do that on their own? Do they get assistance from the agency, from DCAS? If a fellow who completes the program wants to apply for a different vacancy, they go through the normal recruitment process where they can apply and interview for that vacancy.

Are open roles identified by agencies and approved by OMB prior to the beginning of the fellowship to ensure that all fellows are able to move into full-time employment if they want to? Absolutely, that is one of the main criteria of the program — we want to make sure that there is a full-time vacancy that the person can go into.

With the Public Service Corps Program, in FY 2025, 106 interns were placed across seven agencies. In FY 2026, 122 interns were placed across 13 agencies — trending in the right direction. What work did DCAS undertake to expand the number of agencies that host interns and to increase the total number of interns?

Yes, and that is part of the exciting work that we do. Separately, we had within DCAS the Public Service Corps internship and fellowship teams and the recruitment teams, which were under separate units. We brought them under the same umbrella so that we can be more strategic in the outreach that we are doing and amplify those programs a little bit more. Within the Public Service Corps, we really take a look at what our activities are, like our standard operating procedures, and figure out what areas we can improve. Then we go out to agencies and schools, we hold information sessions, our team goes out to work with the federal work-study individuals at respective schools. So we did a lot of boots-on-the-ground activity to make sure that we were able to bring individuals on. We also held our Public Service Corps Expo — twice a year we gather agencies that are interested in hiring interns, bring them in, and they can interview and hire on the spot. We saw that that resulted in a lot of interns being hired.

(01:16:29)

To grow the program, do you have plans to expand that?

(01:16:32)

Oh, absolutely. We are celebrating 60 years next month and so we are also looking at how we are amplifying how we reach Public Service Corps individuals that are qualified for the program and expanding how agencies participate. That is one of our main goals that we are working towards this year. I want to recognize that we have been joined by CM Narcisse. I will ask one more question and then turn it over to my colleague to see if she has any questions.

(01:17:08)

What are DCAS's goals for the program in the future? I see that you have expanded — do you have any specific goals for the future of this program?

(01:17:19)

Yes. So what we are looking at is how do we build pathways where the Civil Service Pathways Program directly leads into a full-time position. We are looking at how do we carry that out for the other programs. So for our Public Service Corps, it could be short term — a person may only be qualified for it because of the federal work-study component for one semester. So we will work with them and say, can they go into a summer internship program? Can someone who participated in the summer internship then come back and participate in the Civil Service Pathways Fellowship? So we are trying to build up those clear pathways and educate the individuals that are participating in those programs so they know what pathways they can take if they have a keen interest in staying in City government. We are trying to just build that up more robustly.

(01:18:08)

Over the last five years, how many interns entered into civil service after graduating

(01:18:16)

college? So that number is a little bit difficult to track just because of the nature of the program. As I mentioned, somebody may just be with us for a semester because that is all their grant allows them to stay, or they come back and alternate between the time. So we do not really know when they graduate, we do not really know if they are going to qualify to participate again. That is why we are focusing on how do we build that continuation where, even if they are not participating in Public Service Corps, they still have an opportunity to work for City government in the other programs that we have.

(01:18:49)

Yes, and is there any thought to figuring out a way to track that? Because I think it is super important to understand the true impact of this program in the long term.

(01:19:06)

Absolutely. Has federal government opposition to diversity and equity policies impacted the demographics of recent classes of interns? And are there any changes to federal work-study eligibility surrounding visas and citizenship status that have changed the population of students you are able to take in as part of the program?

From our viewpoint, we have not seen any change. As you have noticed, we have increased the number of people that are participating in the program and we continue to work with the schools to engage those folks that are qualified. We have not seen any changes. Okay, thank you. I will turn it over to CM Narcisse if you have any questions.

(01:19:49)

Good morning and thank you, Chair. Thank you for being here. I have to apologize for being late because DC 1199 made history today with the City hospital workers, and as a nurse I felt it was imperative for me to be present for them. So that is my apology. On civil service, you know, we are very interested — around New York City that is kind of where you can move yourself from poverty to middle class. So we are very much interested, and I am sure the Chair has been on point with those questions because we want to make sure everyone has the opportunity to elevate themselves in New York City as much as we can.

How many exam fee waivers — you will probably tell me if I am repeating a question, I apologize for that too — how many exam fee waivers were granted last year? And is the waiver process one that people actually use, or are applicants paying fees they

(01:20:58)

should not have to? We can get back to you with the actual number of fee waivers that were issued last year, but it is roughly about 25 to 30% of the applicants who apply for a civil service exam that request a waiver. There are many different waivers that are offered — veterans, folks who receive Social Security insurance, public assistance. If you are unemployed you can take a free exam. Most recently, earlier this year, we implemented two new fee waivers as part of Local Law 57, which offers fee waivers for high school students and first-time test takers. For those two that I just mentioned, we have seen an increase in use, but it is roughly about 30% of test takers. How many veterans preference credits were applied last year? And is DCAS making sure veterans know they are eligible?

(01:22:03)

Thank you for that question. The availability of veterans credits is embedded in all of our marketing materials, so it is in our notice of exam, it is on posters, it is in our special circumstances guides. It is also information that can be amplified through the Department of Veterans Affairs. We make an effort to ensure that all test takers are aware of the many different fee waivers and credits that are available to them.

(01:22:36)

Are you utilizing us as your ally to push? Because I am very big when it comes to veterans. You would be surprised how many veterans in New York City do not know what kind of support they can get, still up to now. There are districts where we can be very helpful to make sure people know. And thank you, because you have been present in my office to support for a variety of different things that we have been doing. I am so appreciative of your service. After someone is reached on the list, how long does it take to actually start the job? Where are the biggest delays — background checks, medical exam, or agency paperwork?

(01:23:25)

So that is a great question. At DCAS, we are here to support agency hiring needs through the administration of examinations. Once the scoring process is complete and that exam is ready for agency use, it is really dependent upon the agency's hiring need to request that list from DCAS to start their internal onboarding process. We work in a decentralized environment, so each agency has their own HR department that manages the actual hiring of the candidate. It is kind of difficult for us to pinpoint exactly where there may be situations at the agency level, but we are working to streamline the examination process as much as possible.

(01:24:15)

And we are here to support agencies in the event that they have an immediate hiring need where they need DCAS to either attract candidates and/or to support a streamlined interview process. We support them in that way.

(01:24:31)

But the way I see it in my brain — if I am sending folks to work for you, at least I need to know what is up. If they are staying, I need to know where they are going and to keep track. I know it can be difficult, but I am just saying.

(01:24:48)

Yeah, we track how the agencies are using the actual civil service list, but the onboarding process is happening at the agency level. So the interviewing, the issuance of onboarding documentation, the investigative process — all of that happens at the agency level.

(01:25:08)

Thank you. Which jobs have the highest turnover in the first two years? Do you know by any chance? And what do exit interviews say about why people leave — because they are leaving the agencies or...

(01:25:20)

We do not have that particular number for you here today, but we would be able to provide information about the exit interviews. For the exit interviews, we do have a survey that agencies use, and we produce a report on it. A lot of it is sometimes the opportunities to grow within their career, or not knowing how to navigate a career in City government after they have been hired, or just wanting to explore other opportunities outside of City government. One of the things that we have is a citywide career counselors program where agencies will have a career counselor, and anyone working in the agency will have access to learning more about how they can progress within their agencies or even across different agencies.

(01:26:12)

First, I am so happy that you are reaching out to our youth in high school. Keep on collaborating with the high schools so young folks know what is available instead of doing what they should not be doing. The collaboration with our CUNY and our City is very helpful. And even the unions — collaborate and let people know that there is more to come as a union member, that there are other things that are valuable for you in the City of New York. Thank you, Chair, and thank you for your time. Keep on doing it. Thank you.

(01:26:46)

Thank you, Council Member. Okay, we are headed to the homestretch now. You actually give me a break. And the youth apprenticeship — since the youth apprenticeship civil service title program was announced, how many youth apprentices have enrolled? So the youth apprenticeship program is a great example of how DCAS collaborates with other City agencies to implement pathway programs. Our main role in the youth apprenticeship program was to help the Mayor's Office of Talent and the Department of Education create the title, or the vehicle, that is used for that particular program. We do not have a direct number for you today because we do not manage the program — we just helped to implement it. So who manages the program? It is a collaboration between the Mayor's Office of Talent and the Department of Education. So do you...

(01:28:04)

...have any sense of what types of apprenticeships they are enrolled in, or what apprenticeships are available through the program? What I can say is that the Department of Education taps into their students to participate in the program. DCAS's role — we do have a minor role in connecting agencies that have positions available that would be a good fit. But if you have anything to add, please jump in.

(01:28:38)

They have several different tracks, so somebody could be in a project management track or they could be interested in IT. Within the youth apprentice title, they have different focused areas that they can participate in, and I know that specifically because I have had...

(01:28:55)

...a couple of them on my team. But they have different tracks that the Department of Education and their partners are determining based on where the needs are within the City, so they can create that match. Okay. So you do not have any data — you do not track the data on this program at all? We do not, correct.

(01:29:17)

Collaboration with Small Business Services on hiring halls — I had the pleasure of attending the citywide disability career fair in Queens over the summer, where we saw a vast number of agencies who were there to conduct interviews and offer job placements. It was a great turnout for applicants seeking employment. What are the specific channels through which DCAS is advertising the day and time of these career fairs, beyond...

(01:29:49)

...public postings? As you know, SBS is the one that manages those hiring events, and we are participating when available. We share that information in our newsletters when available. We have a career and event page on the DCAS job board, so we will post it there. We also have the DCAS-specific recruitment page where we will post information. We hope to amplify the information as much as possible, and then...

(01:30:22)

...participate to share information about jobs when possible. Since 2024, the Department of Small Business Services has facilitated hiring halls for New Yorkers and connected thousands of applicants with employment opportunities. Are there any City agencies that participate in these hiring halls? We do know that there are a lot of City agencies that participate, but that is managed on SBS's side of things. How frequently does DCAS meet with the Office for Talent and Workforce Development to collaborate on future hiring events and outreach? And do the three agencies and entities conduct recruitment separately, or are there examples of where all three are involved in public outreach together?

(01:31:13)

We work with both SBS and Talent separately. For Talent, we engage the career pathways program — meaning part of the work that they do — so we discuss how we can enhance the programs that we have and how we can think about other opportunities. We work with them in a couple of different ways. As we just mentioned with the hiring events, we are helping to amplify that information. We are there providing information sessions during their actual career fairs. We also work with SBS, where we go to the Workforce One Center about eight times a month, whether in person or virtually, to make sure that we are reaching their population. And very excitingly, they have opened a new job center, so we are in conversations with them now about how we can partner to further amplify and reach individuals who are interested in City government.

On agency partnerships — there are over 130 career and technical education schools in New York City that train participants in a variety of different career clusters, ranging from health care and human services to digital technology to agriculture. These schools help build critical career readiness skills, provide financial literacy courses, and can connect students with higher education and employment opportunities. Are these schools considered a civil service pathway that is eligible to be counted as one of DCAS's civil service ambassador outreach events? Absolutely. We try as much as possible to reach those schools. As part of the Career Discovery Week, individuals from those schools come down to DCAS and learn more about other City agencies and also just the process of getting jobs with City government.

(01:33:13)

So we do a lot of engagement with them. Do you have specific data on the schools you...

(01:33:22)

...work with or visited? We can get back to you on the data for that.

(01:33:30)

We saw that in 2025, DCAS engaged in outreach events at just four trade schools. Could you please share which trade schools those were, and whether those schools were selected for the specific purpose of targeting prospective applicants who were learning skills that could help fill crucial roles in the municipal workforce? I will have to...

(01:33:51)

...check and get a list to determine exactly which schools we participated in and worked with. But one of the things that we try to do is, if we know that for example there is an automotive service worker exam coming up, we try to target our outreach to a trade school that deals with automotive work. We try to be strategic in the outreach that we are doing based on agency needs and the exams that are coming up. Okay. Any questions from anybody? No? Good.

(01:34:21)

Okay, I told you we were in the homestretch. Thank you so much for your testimony today, and I hope to continue to work with you to make civil service more robust. I was a caseworker for the City of New York many, many years ago before I went to work for the union. I was a member of the Social Service Employees Union — I have to give them a shout out — Social Service Employees Union Local 371, which is another job that is hard to fill and that has high turnover. We need to figure that out. That is something we really have to figure out, because people burn out very quickly in some of those jobs. But thank you so much again for your testimony today.

Thank you, Chair. My office is always open. I wish we could have a job fair. Thank you. Yeah, that is why the high school programs are meant to address that, with the DOE and all of them. Okay. I will now open the floor for public testimony. Before we begin, I remind members of the public that this is a formal government proceeding and that decorum shall be observed at all times. As such, members of the public shall remain silent at all times. The witness table is reserved for people who wish to testify. No video recording or photography is allowed from the witness table. Further, members of the public may not present audio or video recordings as testimony, but may submit transcripts of such recordings to the Sergeant at Arms for inclusion in the hearing record.

Please fill out an appearance card with the Sergeant at Arms and wait for your name to be called. Once you have been recognized, you will have two minutes to speak on today's oversight topic of Municipal Recruitment and Civil Service Pathways. If you have a written statement or additional written testimony you wish to submit for the record, please provide a copy of that testimony to the Sergeant at Arms. You may also email written testimony to testimony at council.nyc.gov within 72 hours of this hearing. Audio and video recordings will not be accepted. Is there anybody? Please come up when I call your name. For the first panel: Mike Hickey, Rebecca Heywood, Amari DeJardine. Thank you. Okay, who wants to start first?

(01:38:37)

I can go first. You can go first. Okay, perfect. Thank you, Committee Chair. I am Michael Hickey, Chief of Strategy and Operations for Citizens. But I am actually here to talk to you about my work as a former leader at the New York City Public Schools, where I helped to start up the Community Schools team and lead the Students in Temporary Housing team.

This is more of my direct, lived experience with civil service. I want to start by saying that as a hiring manager overseeing hundreds of personnel and operating with dozens of vacancies at any given moment, I was never trained on how civil service works. I was never offered an explainer or tutorial, never invited to a webinar or onboarding session, never given a clear point of contact at my own agency or at DCAS or anywhere else. Everything I learned about civil service I learned by reverse engineering and crowdsourcing an understanding of a Byzantine and Kafkaesque process.

My team worked with homeless families, helping families get access to food, counseling and school supplies. It was very complex, specialized, trauma-informed work. The way a hiring process for our team went was like this: we identified a vacancy and a title, we would assign headcount and budget, and then we would wait — in my case a year or more — for a list to open up. We would wait several more months before the hiring pool began. We would sit all day in a room with dozens of other hiring managers, we would all get to ask one question of a candidate, and then we would have to make a decision then and there about whether or not to hire that candidate. Obviously this is the rule of three, so you either take the person in front of you whether they are qualified or not, or you wait and hope someone better comes along. Obviously this is a really difficult, traumatizing process for someone who is trying to work with vulnerable families and feeling constantly like they are unable to meet the needs of those families because they do not have the trained personnel to do so. Those are limitations that were clearly set by the process of...

(01:40:59)

...civil service itself, rather than the ability to find candidates. Thank you. It includes recommendations. You are welcome.

(01:41:18)

I do not have a hard copy of my testimony but I will share it after the fact. My name is Rebecca Hayward. Good afternoon. I am here today to speak both as a former New York City public servant and as the project lead for DCAS's 2019 citywide hiring assessment — a former DCAS employee who led a review of the City's civil service and hiring process for non-uniformed titles, work that has never been made public. Today I run an organization where I advise governments nationally on civil service modernization and digital transformation, and I talk with candidates every day who are trying to get City jobs.

The issue is that we are trying to make incremental change to a system that needs an overhaul. It makes or breaks the City's ability to deliver key services, and we cannot keep using the same playbook and expecting different results. There is a lot of great work going on at DCAS, but there is also a lot of small steps being taken.

There are a couple of things I want to highlight that have stuck with me from what we learned talking to over 10,000 prospective employees and current City staff back in 2019 about what the true challenges are and how we can address them. The first is really around information. We have talked a lot today about how this is not a process that people understand — it uses jargon and language that most New Yorkers cannot navigate. We found actually that most City employees who took an exam before they were hired already had a close friend or family member who already worked for the City. It is exclusionary in a different way. Because the exams are only offered typically once every five years or more — we are seeing lists established for five, six, seven years now — if you miss your opportunity, you miss out, and the City misses out on a potentially highly skilled employee.

As Mike says, staff hear about it from their colleagues. The last thing I will hit on is that we need to be clear about the data and information that we use, how we talk about it and in what language, how we provide the data to agencies and hiring managers, and make sure that things like the list of civil service titles and whether or not you can qualify for them are made available to the public. It is currently only available on the City's intranet. I have a list of recommendations and other information that I will share via email, and I look forward to hearing more about what the Council is able to...

(01:44:01)

Thank you. Good morning, Chair Aldebol. My name is Catherine Vaughn and I am the co-founder and co-executive director of Abundance New York. We should make it easier, faster, cheaper and fairer to build and deliver what New Yorkers want. We push for housing, for more vibrant public transit and public space, for renewable energy and for more effective government delivery of all of the above. We applaud the work the administration and DCAS are doing to expand access to public sector job opportunities, from the Ambassadors Program to youth apprenticeships and internships, to the recent decision to waive civil service exam fees for high school students and first-time test takers.

We also believe that these measures must be paired with additional reforms to remove bottlenecks and barriers from the entire recruitment and application experience. Free civil service exams keep money in applicants' pockets, but the largest cost they face is time — the months between when exams are offered, the year it takes to get exam results, the months required as hiring managers offer interviews one by one to exam scorers who might no longer be looking for jobs, the nine months of unpaid onboarding time between when a provisional offer is made and when an offer is actually able to start work. In addition to significant time costs, prospective civil servants face additional barriers to finding meaningful careers within the City. Titles and job descriptions are outdated and opaque, information on the hiring process is scattered across different websites and data on different agencies' time to hire is unavailable.

As you review the City's work to recruit diverse talent to its workforce, we urge you to consider the entire application process from soup to nuts and to set ambitious goals around reducing agencies' time to hire and vacancy rates. We propose a variety of categories, which I will share in my written testimony with you afterward. First, ensure that job titles and descriptions reflect the actual work employees are doing and that these roles, along with hiring process details and exam schedules, are posted in plain language. Many roles have not had updated descriptions in years or even decades, resulting in such outdated titles as "computer associate."

Information about which roles require exams is hard to find. I will just quickly go over what I think the second point is: working aggressively to cut evaluation and hiring timelines. As your questioning really pushed into, this could include rethinking when exams are needed, such as for licensed positions where there is already a stringent state-run licensing process. Where civil service exams are still appropriate, thinking about how to speed up through continuous recruitment and exam schedules, choosing to deliver exams via structured interview and moving from the rule of three to banded scoring. Finally, I will underscore the role of transparency in terms of publishing time to hire across agencies, which could both help applicants as they try to get a sense of what they should expect from the process and also identify areas for improvement within and across agencies. Thank you.

(01:46:59)

Very much. Good morning, Chair Aldebol and staff. My name is Amory Dujardin and I am the public policy manager at Citizens Union. A report by the Five Borough Institute at Citizens Union, "Solving the Staffing Crisis," took a deep dive into what City Hall can do to retain and recruit talent, including creative solutions like the programs mentioned here today. We applaud the City for such efforts but we can go further. Taking an exam, applying for that job, going through interviews, receiving an offer and onboarding often takes over a year. This is not a sustainable recruitment strategy for a modern city. We must speed up the hiring timeline and make it easier to apply.

First, adopt band scoring to replace the rule of three. When the City hires, it must find three candidates willing to be hired from a ranked list of those who passed the civil service exam, and hiring managers must call through that list in rank order. Calling through can take ages. Instead, band scoring ranks candidates into tiers such as outstanding, well-qualified and qualified, and allows managers to choose candidates from the top tier based on fit rather than rank order. Another option is for the City to ask the State's Civil Service Commission to remove exam requirements for licensed roles, as Katherine mentioned, where state licensing processes already exist, like for engineers, commercial drivers or nurses. Such a change would only require approval from the Commission.

Additionally, the City should also start being transparent with candidates. Publish expected timelines for exam results and from hire to start date. Find ways to provide other updates. The City's current silence deters candidates from engaging. We also need to simplify the application process by establishing plain language standards across all communications and redesigning the civil service and jobs website, an idea that Rebecca mentioned. The current language is confusing. It would also help if the City built a tool that lets job seekers search for jobs they are eligible for.

(01:48:59)

Right now, candidates have the easiest time applying if they have close friends or family who are civil servants, which creates a problem where only those with insider knowledge apply. These are all ideas the City can take now and we have more if anyone wants to discuss them further. Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I am happy to try to answer any questions.

(01:49:20)

Thank you. Thank you so much for your testimony. I do look forward to working with you all. I know, Catherine, I have been against the one-in-three before. I agree that there are a lot of parts of the system that are antiquated. There are some things that we have to go through the State on — the State has to make changes — and there are some things that we can implement now. What are some of the things that the City can implement? I will ask anybody: what are some of the things that the City can implement now without having to go through the State process? I also agree on the licensing — if people have to go through a licensing process, why go through the whole civil service exam process? I totally agree with a lot of what you have said. But I do want to know from your perspective what the City can do and what we can do as City Council to ensure it moves some of these things forward.

(01:50:35)

Thank you for that question. There is a lot actually that the City can do. I will share some and then invite others to join in. One of the easiest and most straightforward things that DCAS can do on its own is really think about the language that it uses and introduce and mandate plain language standards that actually get implemented.

(01:50:57)

For all sources of information, whether it is going to external applicants, whether every New Yorker understands civil service — I think if you go to the street right now and ask people what civil service is, most people even walking around this district would not necessarily know. Another thing that can be done is to specifically design materials with hiring managers in mind. They play an outsized role in bringing staff into the process in partnership with HR. Make sure that they are prepared to participate and understand all of the options available to them. Katherine mentioned some of the social media push and other types of outreach, which is a great start, but really meeting New Yorkers where they are at through other types of information that is not self-selecting and things that people see every day.

I will quickly go through a couple more. We do not have any mechanisms right now for agencies to share strong candidates who applied to one job, particularly non-competitive roles, with other agencies. We are seeing this come up with the marketing push that was done for the public interest technology roles. The other crews that do not get that same level of marketing — the 4,000-plus candidates for those 35 roles — are not going to be accessible by other agencies. So creating mechanisms there is important.

(01:52:40)

Others have talked a lot about mandating real timelines, both publishing true hiring timelines and identifying the actual bottlenecks that are holding them up, regardless of agency. And then finally, adopting continuous band scoring and alternative evaluation methods like structured interviews, when they are appropriate, can both maintain the principles of merit and fitness while speeding up hiring and recognizing that the job market across the City has changed and that City career paths and job availability need to change along with it.

(01:53:19)

Thank you. Well, let me just say first that the four of us know each other. We have actually spent a lot of time kicking around ideas. We have a giant spreadsheet and we actually went through that to look for ideas that are within the power of the City to enact, that have low cost associated with them and that in many cases have a way to mitigate the political risks or challenges associated with the changes. Those are all important variables. So the things you are hearing us talk about today reflect some of our thinking about what is actionable by the City. A lot of it comes down to starting with clarification. It is a complex process. Most people do not understand it. I worked for the City for almost ten years and had to reverse-engineer my way into understanding it, practically like an investigative journalist.

So I think we can do a lot to make it more approachable. Then we can actually begin to have an honest conversation with our entire workforce about what reform would look like and actually have informed advocates who are hiring managers and who are part of the process to inform it.

(01:54:24)

The things that we are talking about today we believe are common sense. I will mention two specifics that Rebecca did not call out: aligning OMB with the posting authority that is already granted to an agency, so that we are not going through another round of approval from OMB for an unnecessary review. And the mention of practical civil service training for all hiring managers and HR managers across the City — I feel like I could design a really good training for people to understand in a practical manner what this thing is and how you interact with it. I would be more than happy to offer that guidance to my colleagues at DCAS or anywhere else in the City.

I think Mike and Rebecca have covered a lot and, as we have mentioned, we would love to share — we have a whole spreadsheet on this and I think it would take longer than the testimony to go over all those things. But as they both mentioned, putting pressure on the mayoral administration to take these actions would be recommended by us. I also know that there are ongoing contract negotiations right now between the City and unions, and one way to tackle a lengthy list like this would be to establish a labor-management committee as a result of those contract negotiations. That can be advocated for in a contract and we would certainly welcome it. I am sorry, I do not have much to add beyond what the three of them already said and we can...

(01:56:11)

Maybe try to put some of what is in the spreadsheet together into something digestible for your committee. One of our suggestions actually related to the code process was to develop a once-every-five-years or once-every-four-years — at the start of each new mayoral administration — a workforce plan that is kind of similar to the capital planning process, that goes into each of the agencies' five-year outlook and the changing needs of their workforce. I think that also speaks to CM Restler's questions about an aging workforce and the need to really plan around turnover, and then to cross-reference that against data around time to hire and vacancies to identify where elements of this process need to change.

I think many elements can be changed at the City level. Certainly there are some laws that would need to change at the State level, but in our spreadsheet we have many rows of things that only DCAS or the administration could change. I think part of the issue is the lack of centralized data to really demonstrate where the problems are most severe. And I think also, to CM Hudson's point, there are four people testifying right now and there might be a few others, but there is not as much of a constituency for this type of change. Yet we see the direct linkage between vacancies and the time it takes to hire and then the really important work done by civil servants on crises and emergencies that are happening in the City, whether it is Legionnaires' disease or...

(01:57:46)

Just getting people cash assistance on time, which we have done kind of a dismal job at. So I think there is also some work to do to really demonstrate the tie between the experiences that New Yorkers are having that are enabled by government and the bottlenecks and delays that are written into our policies. I really appreciate your testimony and I look forward to getting that spreadsheet to assist our committee in thinking through what we can do to move civil service in a more modern direction, which is one of my primary concerns, especially as chair of this committee. Again, thank you so much for your thoughts and your experiences. Are there any other folks that want to testify? Okay. Seeing no one else in the chamber, is anyone on Zoom? No one on Zoom.

(01:59:01)

Okay. So, seeing that there is no one, I want to remind folks if you are on Zoom that...

(01:59:15)

You can submit your written testimony at Council.nyc.gov within 72 hours of this hearing. We thank the administration and the public for attending this hearing to share your thoughts and for following up on these issues. With that, the hearing is now adjourned.
